Catalan numbers: 1, 1, 2, 5, 14, 42...
## Derivation of the main recurrence for the Catalan numbers and their ogf
### Legal parenthesis sequences; "primitive" legal parenthesis sequences
Many interpretations of the Catalan numbers, but here's an easy one to work with: the nth Catalan number is the number of ways to arrange 2n parentheses (n left ones, n right ones) such that there aren't any right-parens without a left-paren before them. (A.k.a. "legal" parenthesizations). Let $C_n$ denote the set of all legal strings of n-paren pairs, with $c_n = |C_n|$. $c_0$ is defined to be 1, $c_1 = 1$ (with () being the only possible), $c_2 = 2$ (for ()() and (()) also), and so on. Also, let $\omega \in C_n$; define the "index" of $\omega$ to be the size of the first legal substring (when reading from left to right); call this substring the "prefix". E.g. ()() has a prefix size 1, and (()) has a prefix size 2 (you have to read the whole string to get a legal string). Or for $C_3 = \{()()(), (())(), ()(()), ((())), (()())\}$, the indices are 1, 2, 1, 3, 3, respectively. Let a "primitive" string in $C_n$ be one whose index is n, i.e. one where no prefix is a legal string, and let $p_n$ count the number of primitive strings in $C_n$. E.g. $p_3 = 2$. 
### Lemma: counting primitive sequences in terms of general legal sequences
With all these definitions, we have $p_n = c_{n-1}$. Proof: let $w \in C_n$ be primitive. Removing the first and last parens from $w$ produces a legal string from $C_{n-1}$; this is because, given that $w$ must start with ( and end with ) to be legal, if removing those makes it illegal, then either the 2nd char is ) or the 2nd-to-last is (, but in either case the string wouldn't be primitive (fill in later). Also, if $w \in C_{n-1}$, then $(w)$ is a legal parenthesization in $C_n$, and it must be primitive for the same reasons outlined earlier. Thus we have a bijection from primitive n-strings to all n-1 strings.

Now let $w \in C_n$ have index k; then $w$ consists of an element of $C_k$ with an element of $C_{n-k}$ concatenated to the end. Since a prefix must be primitive, there are $p_kc_{n-k}$ legal n-strings of index k. 

Thus $c_n = \sum_{k=1}^n p_kc_{n-k}$. This looks like a convolution, and indeed we can use the product rule here. Let $C(x) = \sum_{n \geq 0}c_nx^n$, or $C(x) - 1 = \sum_{n \geq 1}c_nx^n = \sum_{n \geq 1}(\sum_{k = 1}^n p_kc_{n-k})x^n$, which by the product rule is $\sum_{n \geq 1}p_nx^n * \sum_{n \geq 0}c_nx^n$. Using a lemma from earlier, and factoring out an x from the first factor, this is $x\sum_{n \geq 1}c_{n-1}x^{n-1}\sum_{n \geq 0}c_nx^n$, or $x(C(x))^2$. Thus $C(x) - 1 = x(C(x))^2$. Solving for $C(x)$ gets $C(x) = \frac{1 ± \sqrt{1 - 4x}}{2x}$; of these two solutions, only $\frac{1 - \sqrt{1 - 4x}}{2x}$ approaches 1 as x approaches 0 (which is what we want so that $C(0) = c_0$), so we take $C(x) = \frac{1 - \sqrt{1 -4x}}{2x}$. Bashing a bit with the general binomial theorem, we get $c_n = -\binom{n - 1/2}{n+1}2^{n+1}$, or more nicely as $c_n = \frac{1}{n+1}\binom{2n}{n}$.

## Other interpretations of Catalan numbers
The Catalan numbers count the number of sequences $1 \leq a_1 \leq a_n ... \leq a_n \leq n$ with exactly 1 fixed point, i.e. exactly 1 index $i$ with $a_i = i$. E.g. $c_0$ can be defined to be 1 as usual, $c_1$ is equal to 1 (sequence 1), $c_2$ equals 2 (11 and 22), $c_3$ equals 5 (111, 222, 333, 112, 233), and so on. 

Alternatively, the Catalan numbers count the number of sequences of numbers $a_i, 1 \leq i \leq n$, meeting the following conditions: (1) for all $j, a_1 + a_2 + ... + a_j \geq j$, and (2) $\sum_{k = 1}^n a_k = n$. E.g. for n = 3 the valid sequences are 111, 210, 201, 120, 300. Sketch of a bijection between these sequences and sequences of balanced parentheses: consider strings made by concatenating copies of $\_)$, where the blanks contain a number from 0 to n and where, letting $a_i$ be the number in the ith blank, the $a_i$s satisfy conditions (1) and (2). So e.g. $1)1)1)$ would be one such string. Clearly these strings are in bijection with the sequences of numbers satisfying (1) and (2). We can get a map from these strings to strings of parentheses by replacing each $a_i$ with i left-parens. E.g. $2)1)0)$ gets mapped to $(()())$. The range of this function consists only of balanced strings of parentheses: condition (1) corresponds to the condition that, for a string to be balanced, the jth right-paren must be preceded by at least j left-parens, while condition (2) corresponds to the condition that there must be exactly n left-parens given that there are n right-parens. Also, there is an inverse where (handwaving a bit) you write, in blank j, the number of left-parens between right-paren j and the previous left-paren (or the start of the string, for the first right-paren). E.g. $(()())$ goes 2 left, right, 1 left, right, 0 left, right, so it gets mapped to $2)1)0$. 