Cubic Curves and Elliptic Curves.md, before:

# Cubics with Genus 0
We first consider some "special" cubic curves, which are distinguished from the more typical elliptic curves by having singular points. These will turn out to be the cubics whose Riemann surface has genus 0; their most notable feature is that they have rational parameterizations.
## Semicubical Parabola
```desmos-graph
y^2 = x^3
```
The "semicubical parabola" has the equation $y^2 = x^3$. It has a sharp "cusp" at the origin: if we try to differentiate it implicitly we get $2yy' = 3x^2$ or $y' = \frac{3x^2}{2y}$, which clearly does not exist when $y = 0$; the same problem arises if we try differentiating with respect to $x$ instead. 

We can find by inspection the parameterization $(t^2, t^3)$. Alternatively, consider a line through the origin $y = tx$; we get $t^2x^2 - x^3 = 0$ or $x^2(x - t^2) = 0$, so there is an intersection of multiplicity $2$ at the origin and of multiplicity $1$ at $x = t^2$, whose corresponding y-coordinate is $t^3$. 
## Folium
```desmos-graph
x^3 + y^3 = 3xy
```
The "folium of Descartes" has the equation $x^3 + y^3 = 3axy$. This also has a singular point--here a point of self-intersection--at the origin. We can find a parameterization by the same strategy: substituting $y = tx$ we get $x^3 + t^3x^3 - 3atx^2 = 0$, or $x^2((1 + t^3)x - 3at) = 0$. This intersects the curve with multiplicity $2$ at the origin and multiplicity $1$ at $x = \frac{3at}{1 + t^3}$, $y = tx = \frac{3at^2}{1 + t^3}$. 

## Existence of Rational Parameterizations
Above, we used the same strategy for finding rational parameterizations that we used to find [[Quadratic Curves and Quadric Surfaces#Rational Parameterizations|rational parameterizations of conics]]: we picked a rational point, drew a line through it, and found that it intersected the curve in exactly one other point. This works because of Bezout's theorem. For a conic with no singular points, a line intersects the curve in 2 points; for a cubic with a singular point (of multiplicity 2), a line through that singular point can only intersect the curve in one more point. Thus we should expect to find rational parameterizations of cubics with a (rational) singular point, but not necessarily of other cubics.

Commit message:

Adding changes in abstract algebra + algebraic geometry + algebraic topology notes from break + first week of classes

Cubic Curves and Elliptic Curves.md, after:

# Cubics with Genus 0
We first consider some "special" cubic curves, which are distinguished from the more typical elliptic curves by having singular points. These will turn out to be the cubics whose Riemann surface has genus 0; their most notable feature is that they have rational parameterizations.
## Semicubical Parabola
```desmos-graph
y^2 = x^3
```
The "semicubical parabola" has the equation $y^2 = x^3$. It has a sharp "cusp" at the origin: if we try to differentiate it implicitly we get $2yy' = 3x^2$ or $y' = \frac{3x^2}{2y}$, which clearly does not exist when $y = 0$; the same problem arises if we try differentiating with respect to $x$ instead. 

We can find by inspection the parameterization $(t^2, t^3)$. Alternatively, consider a line through the origin $y = tx$; we get $t^2x^2 - x^3 = 0$ or $x^2(x - t^2) = 0$, so there is an intersection of multiplicity $2$ at the origin and of multiplicity $1$ at $x = t^2$, whose corresponding y-coordinate is $t^3$. 
## Folium
```desmos-graph
x^3 + y^3 = 3xy
```
The "folium of Descartes" has the equation $x^3 + y^3 = 3axy$. This also has a singular point--here a point of self-intersection--at the origin. We can find a parameterization by the same strategy: substituting $y = tx$ we get $x^3 + t^3x^3 - 3atx^2 = 0$, or $x^2((1 + t^3)x - 3at) = 0$. This intersects the curve with multiplicity $2$ at the origin and multiplicity $1$ at $x = \frac{3at}{1 + t^3}$, $y = tx = \frac{3at^2}{1 + t^3}$. 

## Classification of Singular Points
In [[Intersections and Singular Points of Curves#Types of Singular Points]], nodes and cusps were defined, and it was shown that the semicubical parabola has a cusp, and the folium has a node. In fact, these are the only two singular points that can show up on an irreducible cubic (in an algebraically closed field). Furthermore, there can be at most one singular point. 

Proof: a singular point on a cubic cannot have multiplicity more than $3$, since a multiplicity of at least $4$ implies the existence of terms of degree at least $4$. Furthermore, if the multiplicity is $3$ then the cubic must be reducible. Let $x^3 + ax^2 y + bxy^2 + cy^3$ be a homogenous cubic; we can assume that there is a nonzero coefficient on $x^3$ because, if not, it would be divisible by $y$ and thus clearly reducible. We can then factor $x^3 + ax^2 + bx + c = (x - p)(x - q)(x - r)$, since our field of coefficients is algebraically closed, and then $(x - yp)(x - yq)(x - yr) = x^3 + ax^2 y + bxy^2 + cy^3$. This leaves multiplicity $2$ as the only option.

Recall that, at the origin (and we may assume without loss of generality that the singular point is at the origin), tangents are linear factors of the lowest-degree nonzero homogenous part. When the origin has multiplicity $2$, tangents are linear factors of the quadratic part, and there can be at most $2$ of those. Thus there are either no tangents, 1 tangent, or 2. Let $ax^2 + bxy + cy^2$ be the quadratic part of the curve; by a similar argument to the above, this factors as $(x - py)(x - qy)$ (supposing WLOG that $a$ is nonzero--at least one of the coefficients must be nonzero, anyway), so there are either 2 tangents (if $p \neq q$) or 1. In the first case the origin is a node, by definition. In the second case we are most of the way towards proving that it is a cusp, and just need to show that the unique tangent intersects the curve with multiplicity $3$. By rotating coordinates we may assume that the tangent is the $x$-axis, in which case the quadratic part of the curve is $y^2$. Thus $f = y^2 + g(x, y)$ where $g$ is homogenous of degree $3$. Thus we're looking for $\mu_0(y, y^2 + g(x, y))$. But, by subtracting off multiples of $y$, we can kill off all terms in $y^2 + g(x, y)$ that are divisible by $y$. That means all of the terms in the homogenous cubic $g(x, y)$, except the pure-$x$ term $ax^3$, where the $a$ must be nonzero or else $f$ would be reducible (divisble by $y$). Thus $\mu_0(y, y^2 + g(x, y)) = \mu_0(y, x^3) = 3$, so the origin is a cusp. 
## Existence of Rational Parameterizations
Above, we used the same strategy for finding rational parameterizations that we used to find [[Quadratic Curves and Quadric Surfaces#Rational Parameterizations|rational parameterizations of conics]]: we picked a rational point, drew a line through it, and found that it intersected the curve in exactly one other point. This works because of Bezout's theorem. For a conic with no singular points, a line intersects the curve in 2 points; for a cubic with a singular point (of multiplicity 2), a line through that singular point can only intersect the curve in one more point. Thus we should expect to find rational parameterizations of cubics with a (rational) singular point, but not necessarily of other cubics.
