## Binet's formula
### Derivation of the ogf for the Fibonacci numbers
The Fibonacci numbers are defined by $f_0 = 1, f_1 = 1, f_{n+2} = f_{n+1} + f_n$. This gives $F(x) = \sum_{n \geq 0}f_{n+2}x^{n+2} = \sum_{n \geq 0}f_{n+1}x^{n+2} + \sum_{n \geq 0}f_nx^{n+2}$. Changing indices and bringing back "dropped" terms, we get $F(x) - a_0 - a_1x = x(F(x) - a_0) + x^2F(x)$, or $F(x) - 1 - x = xF(x) - x + x^2F(x)$. Rearranging gets $F(x) - xF(x) - x^2F(x) = 1$ or $F(x) = \frac{1}{1 - x - x^2}$. 
### Derivation of Binet's formula from the ogf
The denominator has roots $\frac{1 + \sqrt{5}}{-2}, \frac{1 - \sqrt{5}}{-2}$ (call these $r_1, r_2$ respectively for convenience). So $F(x) = \frac{1}{(x-r_1)(x-r_2)}$. Partial fractions gets $\frac{1}{(x-r_1)(x-r_2)} = \frac{A}{x-r_1} + \frac{B}{x-r_2}$, or $A(x-r_2) + B(x-r_1) = 1$, giving the linear system $-Ar_2 - Br_1 = 1, A + B = 0$. So $A = -B$, giving $Br_2 - Br_1 = 1$, or $B = \frac{1}{r_2 - r_1}$. Expanding out that denominator gets $\frac{1-\sqrt{5}}{-2} - \frac{1 + \sqrt{5}}{-2} = \frac{-2\sqrt{5}}{-2} = \sqrt{5}$, so $B = \frac{1}{\sqrt{5}}$, and $A = \frac{-1}{\sqrt{5}}$. Note also that we can rewrite the denominators of the partial-fraction expansion as $-r_1(1 - \frac{x}{r_1})$ and $-r_2(1 - \frac{x}{r_2})$, respectively, so $F(x) = \frac{-1}{-r_1(1 - \frac{x}{r_1})} + \frac{1}{-r_2(1 - \frac{x}{r_2})}$. ...
## Combinatorial interpretation: tiling with monominos and dominos
Let $B_n$ a 1 by n board (of n squares), and let $f_n$ be the number of ways to cover $B_{n}$ with 1 by 1 and 1 by 2 tiles. So e.g. $f_1 = 1$ (cover with 1 monimino), $f_2 = 2$ (cover with either 2 monominos or 2 dominos), $f_3 = 3$ (3 monominos, 1 monomino and then 1 domino, or 1 domino and then 1 monomino), and so on. Defining $f_0$ to be 1 in order to get the right initial conditions, we see that the sequence $f_n$ is indeed the Fibonacci numbers. Indeed, you can tile $B_{n+2}$ by placing a monomino at the start and tiling the rest ($f_{n+1}$ ways to do that), or placing a domino at the start and tiling the rest ($f_n$ ways to do that), so $f_{n+2} = f_{n+1} + f_n$.
### Alternate derivation of the ogf for the Fibonacci numbers
Instead of going from this recurrence to the ogf, we can approach differently: write $F(x)$ as a sum of polynomials by breaking into cases based on the number of tiles used. So e.g. start with $x^1 + x^2$ (the first term represents 1 way to tile $B_1$, namely with a single monomino, while the second represents 1 way to tile $B_2$, namely using a single domino). Then the 2-tile case is represented by $(x^1 + x^2)(x^1 + x^2)$-- expanding this out involves choosing a term from the first factor, then one from the second, representing choices of monominos or dominos, and the resulting term will have an exponent corresponding to the size of the board tiled by that choice of monominoes and dominoes. E.g. expanding the above gets $x^1x^1 + x^1x^2 + x^2x^1 + x^2x^2 = x^2 + 2x^3 + x^4$; with 2 tiles, you can tile $B_2$ in 1 way (2 monominos), $B_3$ in 2 ways (monomino-domino or domino-monomino), and $B_4$ in 1 way (2 dominos). The generalization is: $F(x) = \sum_n (x + x^2)^n$. Again, a single "uncollected" term in the expansion of $(x + x^2)^n$ (say with exponent k) represents a single tiling of $B_k$ with n tiles, summing together the terms in the expansion of $(x + x^2)^n$ gets you all the ways to tile boards with n tiles (the coefficient on $x^k$ corresponding to the total number of ways to tile $B_k$ with n tiles), and summing these expansions over all n leaves you with the coefficient on $x^k$ being the number of ways to tile $B_k$ with any number of tiles. Note that $F(x) = G(H(x))$ where $H(x) = x + x^2, G(x) = \sum_nx^n = \frac{1}{1-x}$. So $F(x) = \frac{1}{1- (x + x^2)} = \frac{1}{1 - x - x^2}$, exactly as derived earlier. 
## Some identities with Fibonacci numbers
### Binomial coefficient identity for the Fibonacci numbers
$F(x) = \sum_{n \geq 0}(x + x^2)^n$, and from there (factoring, then using the binomial theorem, then interchanging the sum) $\sum_{n \geq 0}(x(1+x))^n = \sum_{n \geq 0}x^n\sum_k\binom{n}{k}x^k = \sum_{k \geq 0}\sum_n\binom{n}{k}x^{n+k}$. This expands out into $\sum_n\binom{n}{0}x^n + \sum_n\binom{n}{1}x^{n+1} ...$, and the $x^j$ term of all this is $\binom{j}{0} + \binom{j-1}{1} + \binom{j-2}{2}...$ so in fact $f_j = \sum_{k \geq 0}\binom{j-k}{k}$. In other words, the Fibonacci numbers show up as sums along certain diagonals of Pascal's triangle. 
1
1 1
1 2 1 
1 3 3 1
1 4 6 4 1
1 5 10 10 5 1
Indeed, if, for each row, you sum all the numbers in a line going due "northeast" from the leftmost 1, you get 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8... as desired. 
### Misc. Fibonacci Identities
$f_0 + f_1 + ... + f_n = f_{n+2} - 1$. Proof: how many ways to cover $B_{n+2}$ with at least one domino? On the RHS you take all coverings and subtract out the single all-monomino covering. On the LHS, condition on the location of the last domino. E.g. there are $f_n$ tilings where the last domino covers the last 2 squares (corresponding to the $f_n$ ways to fill the other n squares in any way); if the last domino starts in the 3rd-from-the-end square (with a monomino filling the last square), then there are $f_{n - 1}$ ways to tile the n-1 squares in front; and so on.

$f_{2n+1} = f_nf_{n+1} + f_{n-1}f_n$. Proof: consider the 2n+1 board as divided into an n-board and an n+1 board. On one hand, we could tile the n-board and then separately the n+1 board, giving $f_nf_{n+1}$ tilings; but that necessarily means that no domino starts on the n+1'th square, else that would overlap between the two partial boards and we couldn't tile them separately. In that case, there are n-1 tiles in the first part and n in the second, or $f_{n-1}f_n$ ways to tile in that case.

$\sum_{k=0}^n f_{2k+1}(-1)^{n-k} = f_nf_{n+1}$. Proof: let $H(x) = \sum_nh_nx^n$, where $h_n = f_nf_{n+1}$. By the above, $f_{2n+1} = h_n + h_{n-1}$. This means $H(x) + xH(x) = \sum_{n \geq 0}h_nx^n + \sum_{n \geq 0}h_nx^{n+1} = \sum_{n \geq 0}(h_n + h_{n+1})x^n$, which then equals $\sum_{n \geq 0}f_{2n+1}x^n$ (by the lemma above). This has an ogf of $\frac{1}{1 - 3x + x^2}$ (exercise); call this $G(x)$. So $H(x) = \frac{1}{1+x}G(x)$. Thus $f_nf_{n+1} = [x^n]\frac{G(x)}{1+x} = \sum_{k=0}^n(-1)^{n-k}f_{2n+1}$. (note the alternating sign, due to multiplying by 1/(1+x) instead of 1/(1-x)) 