# Definition
A field is a commutative [[Rings|ring]] in which all nonzero elements have a multiplicative inverse. (We also add, to exclude the zero ring, that $0 \neq 1$.)
# Examples
The standard examples of fields are $\Q, \R, \C$, and the integers modulo a prime $p$. Further examples tend to be built out of those basic ones. For example, we can construct fields by adjoining elements to existing fields, or equivalently, by taking quotients of polynomial rings; this is done in [[Rings]]. This leads to, for example, $\Q[\sqrt{2}]$ and $\Q[i]$.
# Relation Between Rings and Fields
We know that any integral domain can be embedded naturally into a field, namely the field of fractions. Conversely, if a ring $R$ is a subring of a field $F$, then $R$ is an integral domain: if $xy = 0$ with $x, y \in R$ and $x$ and $y$ both $0$ (say WLOG $x \neq 0$), we can cancel $x$ using its inverse from $F$ to get $y = 0$, as desired. 

....
# Field Extensions
## Types of Extensions: Finite and Infinite, Algebraic and Transcendental
Definition: let $K$ be a field extension of $F$ (so $K$ is an $F$-vector space); we call the dimension of $K$ over $F$ the degree of the $K$, $[K : F]$. (Note that if $K$ is obtained by quotienting by an irreducible polynomial over $F$, the degree of $K$ is equal to the degree of that polynomial). An extension is called finite if it is finite-dimensional over $F$, i.e. $[K : F]$ is finite. Otherwise it is an infinite extension. In a finite extension, all elements are algebraic over the base field. Equivalently, if $K$ has an element which is transcendental over $F$ then $K$ is an infinite extension.

Proof: let $[K : F] = n$, so $K$ is a finite extension; then $\{1, \alpha, \dots \alpha^n\}$ for any $\alpha \in K$ is linearly dependent over $F$. Thus there exist coefficients $c_0, \dots, c_n$ with $c_0 + c_1\alpha + \dots + c_n\alpha^n = 0$, and so $\alpha$ is a root of the polynomial $c_0 + c_1x + \dots + c_nx^n$. 

Similarly, we define an algebraic extension $K$ of a field $F$ where every element of $K$ is algebraic over $F$. A finite extension is algebraic, as seen above, but the converse is not true: if we look at $\ol{\Q}$, a.k.a the algebraic numbers, the field of all complex numbers which are algebraic over $\Q$, then it is an infinite extension. (For, if it had degree $n$, then every rational polynomial of degree more than $n$ would be reducible, which is false.)
## Restrictions on finite fields
Our results about fields extensions as vector spaces so far hold for arbitrary fields, including finite fields. This lets us prove the following result: every finite field $F$ has $p^n$ elements for some prime $p$. Proof: We know that, if $F$ is finite, then it can't have characteristic $0$, so $F$ has characteristic $p$ for some prime $p$. If we look at just the elements $1, 1 + 1, 1 + 1 + 1, \dots$ all the way up to adding $1$ to itself $p-1$ times, these form a subfield of $F$ isomorphic to $\Z/p\Z$ (as we can see by using the first isomorphism theorem on the obvious homomorphism $\Z \to F$). Thus $F$ is an extension of $\Z/p\Z$. Since it has only finitely many elements, it must be finite-dimensional, and so isomorphic to $\F_p^n$, which has $p^n$ elements. 

## Tower Lemma
Let $F \subseteq K \subseteq L$ be a sequence of two field extensions (specifically finite extensions); then $[L:F] = [L : K][K : F]$. 

Proof: Let $\alpha_1, \dots, \alpha_n$ be a basis for $K$ over $F$, and let $\beta_1, \dots, \beta_m$ be a basis for $L$ over $K$. We claim that the set of all products of the form $\alpha_i\beta_j$ is a basis of $L$ over $F$; once we've proved this, our claim about the indices will follow immediately (since this basis has $nm = [L : K][K : F]$ elements). 

For the fact that these span $L$, note that for any element in $l \in L$ we have $b_1\beta_1 + \dots + b_m\beta_m = l$ where all the coefficients are in $K$; then we can expand each of those $b_j \in K$ into $\beta_j = \sum_i c_{ij}\alpha_i$ where all the $c_{ij}$ are in $F$. Then we just substitute these in to get $l = \sum_j b_j\beta_j = \sum_j \sum_i c_{ij}\alpha_i\beta_j$, as desired. 

Then we just need that the $\alpha_i\beta_j$ are linearly independent over $F$. Suppose $\sum_i^n \sum_j^m c_{ij}\alpha_i\beta_j = 0$; then this reduces to $(\sum_{i = 1}^n c_{i1}\alpha_i)\beta_1 + \dots + (\sum_{i=1}^n c_{im}\alpha_i)\beta_m$ = 0. Using the linear independence of the $\beta_j$ over $K$ (which contains all of those sub-sums by which the $\beta_j$ are being multiplied), we get that each of these sums individually must be $0$. Then for any $j$ we have $\sum_{i=1}^n c_{ij}\alpha_i = 0$, and using the linear independence of the $\alpha_i$ we get that all of the $c_{ij}$ for this particular $j$ must be $0$. Thus all the coefficents are all equal to $0$ and so the $\alpha_i\beta_j$ are linearly independent. 

Now we go back to quotienting by irreducible polynomials. Letting $K$ be the field extension $F[x]/(p(x))$ of $F$, where $p(x)$ is irreducible, we have that $[K : F] = \deg(p(x))$. Suppose this is more than $1$; then $p(x)$ has no roots in $F$, but we might wonder whether it at least has roots in $K$. The answer is yes: $\ol{x}$ is a root of $p(x)$ in $K$. After all, letting $p(x) = c_0 + \dots + c_nx^n$, if we plug in $\ol{x}$ we get $p(\ol{x}) = \ol{p(x)} = \ol{0}$. So when we extend a field by quotienting, we often end up with more roots. 

We might then wonder at what point we can stop: when does $F$ contain a root for every polynomial in $F[x]$? In this case we call $F$ algebraically closed, like the complex numbers and $\ol{\Q}$. 

Some equivalent conditions: $F$ is algebraically closed if and only if every polynomial in $F[x]$ factors completely into linear factors, if and only if the only irreducible polynomials in $F[x]$ are linear, if and only if the only finite extension of $F$ is $F$ itself. 

Proof: if $F$ is algebraically closed, then for any $p(x) \in F[x]$, $p$ has a root $\alpha$, so we can factor it as $(x - \alpha)q(x)$ where $q(x) \in F[x]$. That will then also have a root, and we can continue inductively until we're left with just linear factors (and a constant in case $p$ isn't monic). Then for the second implication, if every polynomial in $F[x]$ factors completely into linear factors, then if $p$ has degree more than $1$ it won't be irreducible, as it will factor into $\deg(p(x))$ linear factors. For the third, suppose the only irreducible polynomials in $F[x]$ are linear. Then let $K$ be a finite extension of $F$ and suppose we have an element $\alpha$ in $K$ which is not in $F$. Then $F \subseteq F[\alpha] \subseteq K$; $F[\alpha]$ is isomorphic to $F[x]/(p(x))$ where $p$ is the minimal polynomial of $F$. Since $p$ is irreducible, it is linear, so $F[\alpha]$ has degree $1$ over $F$, meaning that $F[\alpha]$ is just $F$ itself. Finally, to complete the circle, suppose $F$ is not algebraically closed, so there exists $p(x) \in F[x]$ with no roots in $F$, and so no linear factors. Then we have an irreducible polynomial (not necessarily $p(x)$) of degree at least $2$, and quotienting by that gives us a field extension of degree at least $2$. Thus $F$ has a finite extension that isn't just $F$. 

We also have a related theorem, that algebraic extensions "compose": if $F \subseteq K$ and $K \subseteq L$ are algebraic extensions, then so is $F \subseteq L$. N.B. if we replaced "algebraic" with "finite" then this would follow from the Tower Lemma, but not all algebraic extensions are finite. Proof: take any $\beta \in L$; we want to show that $\beta$ is algebraic over $F$. We know by assumption that $\beta$ is algebraic over $K$, so that e.g. $p(x) = x^n + c_{n-1}x^{n-1} + \dots + c_0$, whose coefficients are all in $K$, has $\beta$ as a root. Furthermore, since $K$ is an algebraic extension of $F$, each of those coefficients is algebraic over $F$, implying that, for each $i$, $F[c_i]$ is a finite-dimensional vector space over $F$. (This way we don't have to explicitly work with the polynomials over $F$ of which the $c_i$ are roots.) Now consider the tower $F \subseteq F[c_0] \subseteq F[c_0] [c_1] \subseteq \dots \subseteq F[c_0, \dots, c_{n-1}]$. Each of of those $\subseteq$ represents a finite extension, i.e. each time we add adjoin one of the coefficients we get a finite extension of the field we got by adjoining the previous coefficients. Thus $F[c_0, \dots, c_{n-1}]$ is a finite extension of $F$, by repeated use of the tower lemma. Similarly adjoining $\beta$ to this also gives us a finite extension, since $\beta$ is algebraic over $F[c_0, \dots, c_{n-1}]$. Thus $F[c_0, \dots, c_{n-1}, \beta]$ is a finite extension of $F$, meaning $\beta$ is algebraic over $F$. Thus every element of $K$ is algebraic over $F$ and so $K$ is an algebraic extension of $F$.  

## Fundamental Theorem of Algebra
We can rephrase this as follows: given a polynomial $f \in \C$, does there exist $z$ such that $f(z) = 0$? 

First we consider what monomials $x^n$ do to circles in the complex plane. A circle with radius $R$, consisting of all complex numbers of the form $Re^{i\theta}$, gets sent to the set of all complex numbers of the form $R^ne^{in\theta}$, which is just the circle of radius $R^n$. The $n$ in the $e^{in\theta}$ part just controls how "quickly" elements on the circle get rotated around the center. 

Now consider a general polynomial $x^n + c_{n-1}x^{n-1} + \dots + c_0$. Let $R$ be a number larger than $n$ times the coefficient $c_i$ with the largest absolute value, say, $R > 100n|c_i|$, and consider the circle centered at the origin with radius $R$. The image of this circle will be roughly a circle of radius $R^n$, with some "wobbles", whose size is controlled by $|c_{n-1}x^{n-1} + \dots + c_0|$. But this is at most $|c_{n-1}x^{n-1}| + \dots + |c_0| = |c_{n-1}||x^{n-1}| + \dots + |c_1||x| + c_0$, by the triangle inequality, and if $x$ is on the circle of radius $R$, this is equal to $|c_{n-1}|R^{n-1} + \dots + |c_0|$. This in turn is at most $|c_i|R^{n-1}  + \dots + |c_i| = n|c_i|R^{n-1}$ (recalling that $c_i$ is the largest of the coefficients) which, given how we chose $R$, is less than $\frac{1}{100}R^n$. Thus the image of the circle of radius $R$ differs from a circle of radius $R^n$ by one part in 100 or so. Now consider what happens as we continuously shrink the circle of radius $1$ down to one point in the complex plane, the constant term $c_0$. Since the polynomial is continuous, the shape of the image will vary continuously as well, and at some point it must pass through the origin. The preimage of the point in the image which passes through $0$ will then be a root. 
