# Definition
The fundamental group $\pi_1(X, x_0)$ is a group associated with any "pointed space", i.e. topological space $X$ with a "basepoint" $x_0$ singled out. It is the set of loops based at $x_0$, under the equivalence relation given by [[Homotopy]] of loops. The group operation is given by composition of loops: tracing out one loop, then another, gives you another loop. 

More formally, recall that a path is a continuous function $[0, 1] \to X$ (usually we will denote $[0, 1]$ by $I$ in what follows); a loop is a path with $f(0) = f(1)$. If $f(0) = x_0$ we say that the loop is based at $x_0$. Recall also that a homotopy of paths is a homotopy relative to $\{0, 1\}$ ("with endpoints fixed"); a homotopy of loops is the same ("with the basepoint fixed")--when deforming the loop, we always keep its start and end fixed at $x_0$. 

Then the homotopy of loops gives an equivalence relation on loops; thus for any loop $f$ based at $x_0$ we can speak of its equivalence class $[f]$. 

We can define an operation on loops based at $x_0$ as follows. Let $f: I \to X$ and $g: I \to X$ be two such loops; then let $fg: I \to X$ be given by $(fg)(t) = f(2t)$ if $0 \leq t \leq 1/2$, $(fg)(t) = g(2t - 1)$ if $1/2 \leq t \leq 1$. This is well-defined at $t = 1/2$ since $f(1) = g(0) = x_0$. Also, $(fg)(0) = f(0) = x_0$ and $(fg)(1) = g(1) = x_0$, so this composition gives another loop based at $x_0$. Essentially the same strategy gives us a way to compose paths: sticking together a path from $a$ to $b$ and a path from $b$ to $c$ in this way gives us a path from $a$ to $c$. 

The operation on loops has few nice algebraic properties--it is not associative, for example. But once we pass to equivalence classes, it does give a group operation. Define $[f][g] = [fg]$. We first check that this is well-defined by showing that it does not depend on the choice of representative for $[f]$ and $[g]$: if $f \simeq f'$ and $g \simeq g'$ then $fg \simeq f'g'$. We will do this for arbitrary paths, not just loops. Let $f$ be a path from $a$ to $b$ and $g$ be a path from $b$ to $c$. Let $F$ be a homotopy from $f$ to $f'$ and let $G$ be a homotopy from $g$ to $g'$. Now define a homotopy $H$ by: $H_t(s) = F_{t}(2s)$ for $0 \leq s \leq 1/2$; and $H_t(s) = G_t(2s - 1)$ otherwise. Note that this fixes $a, b, c$ for all values of $t$ (i.e. fixes both the "endpoints" and "midpoint"). 
## Verification of the Group Axioms
We now show that the operation on equivalence classes of loops based at $x_0$ given by $[f][g] = [fg]$ is associative, has an identity element, and is invertible. (Strictly speaking we need to check closure, but this follows automatically from the fact that the composition of two loops at $x_0$ is another loop at $x_0$, and the fact that the operation is well-defined on equivalence classes.)

The identity element is the homotopy class of the constant path given by $c(t) = x_0$ for all $t$. Then the claim is that $[f][c] = [fc] = [f]$ for all $f$, and the same for $[c][f]$. Thus we need to prove that $fc$ is homotopic to $f$. Explicitly, $(fc)(t) = f(2t)$ for $0 \leq t \leq 1/2$, $(fc)(t) = x_0$ for $1/2 \leq t \leq 1$. Observe that $fc$ is actually just a reparameterization of $f$: it is equal to $f \circ r$ where $r: I \times I$ is given by $r(t) = 2t$ for $0 \leq t \leq 1/2$, $r(t) = 1$ otherwise. By a lemma proved in [[Homotopy#Homotopy of Maps]], $f$ is homotopic to any reparameterization of $f$. Thus $f \simeq fc$ and so $[f] = [fc]$, as desired. Essentially the same argument shows that $[c][f] = [f]$. Thus $[c]$ is an identity element. 


For associativity, we need to show $([f][g])[h] = [f]([g][h])$ for all $f, g, h$. In other words $[(fg)h] = [f(gh)]$. The path on the left goes through $f$ for $t \in [0, 1/4]$, $g$ for $t \in [1/4, 1/2]$, and $h$ for $t \in [1/2, 1]$; the path on the right does the same for $f$ for $t \in [0, 1/2]$, $g$ for $t \in [1/2, 3/4]$, and $h$ for $t \in [3/4, 1]$. Thus the two paths go through the same points, just at different speeds, so we should expect one to be a reparameterization of the other. 

The inverse of $[f]$ is given by $[\ol{f}]$ where $\ol{f}$ is "$f$ run backwards": $\ol{f}(t) = f(1 - t)$. We have $(f\ol{f})(t) = f(2t)$ for $0 \leq t \leq 1/2$, $(f\ol{f})(t) = \ol{f}(2t - 1) = f(1 - 2t + 1) = f(-2t + 2)$ otherwise. .....