$\newcommand{\Aut}{\text{Aut}}$ $\newcommand{\F}{\mathbb{F}}$ 
$\newcommand{\Q}{\mathbb{Q}}$ 
$\newcommand{\ol}{\overline}$ 
# Symmetries of Field Extensions
We begin by defining isomorphisms of an extension $K$ of a field $F$. These are field automorphisms of $K$ that are the identity on $F$; that is, not only should they preserve the operations and identity elements, they should have no effect on the elements of $F$. 

One example is complex conjugation, $a + bi \to a - bi$. That this is an automorphism of $\C$ follow from the fact that $\ol{x + y} = \ol{x} + \ol{y}$ and the same for multiplication, and of course the conjugate of a real number is itself. 

Another example is the function $\phi(a) = a^p$ in any field $F$ of characteristic $p$, considered as an extension of $\F_p$. Certainly we have $\phi(ab) = (ab)^p = a^pb^p = \phi(a)\phi(b)$, and $(a + b)^p = a^p + b^p$ follows from the fact that the middle terms of the binomial expansion have coefficients divisible by $p$. Then the fact that $\phi$ is the identity on $\F_p$ follows from Fermat's little theorem, $\phi(n) = n^p = n$ whenever $n \in \{0, \dots, p-1\}$. 

# Separable Polynomials and Extensions
We will see later that every (finite) "Galois extension" of a field is one that is both "separable" and "normal". We will first do some technical work to define these. 

## Separable Polynomials
Define a *separable* polynomial $p \in F[x]$ to be one with distinct roots when factored in some extension field $K$. The discriminant tests whether a polynomial is separable, but is very complicated and difficult to work with for polynomials of high degree. 
### Separability and the Formal Derivative
For real polynomials we have a nice additional criterion: a polynomial has a repeated root at $c$ if it is tangent to the x-axis at $c$, i.e. $f(c) = 0$ and $f'(c) = 0$. In fact, we can define a "formal" derivative for polynomials over arbitrary fields; this is a linear map $D: F[x] \to F[x]$ whose action on monomials $x^n$ is $D(x^n) = nx^{n-1}$ (defining $n$ in an arbitrary field to be $1$ added to itself $n$ times; in characteristic $p$ this might turn out to be $0$). 

As it happens, the product rule carries over just using the formal derivative. (This follows by checking that $D(fg)$ is linear in $f$ and $g$ and then showing that the conclusion is true for products of monomials.)

With the formal derivative, we can get a condition for separability: $f(x)$ is separable if and only if $\gcd(f, D(f)) = 1$. 

Proof: note first that if $c$ is a root of $f$ then $f(x) = (x - c)q(x)$, so $f'(x) = q(x) + (x - c)q'(x)$. Thus $f'(c) = q(c)$. Now $c$ is a repeated root if and only if $q(c) = 0$, which is true if and only if $f'(c) = 0$, i.e. $c$ is a root of $f'$. 

Thus if we have a repeated root $c$, it will be a root of the derivative, so $\gcd(f, Df)$ will be divisible by $x - c$ and so will not be $1$. Conversely if $g(x) = \gcd(f, Df) \neq 0$ then $g(x)$ divides both $f$ and $Df$, so any root of $g$ (possibly in some bigger extension field) is a root of $f$ and $Df$, which by the reasoning above means that $c$ is a repeated root of $f$.
### Characteristic 0 vs. Characteristic p
Over fields of characteristic $0$, at least, every irreducible polynomial is separable. Thus separability is not necessarily very interesting in characteristic $0$--it's more interesting over characteristic $p$, as will be seen later. Proof: if $p$ is a non-constant irreducible polynomial, then $Dp$ has degree $\deg(p) - 1$, and in particular is nonzero--we don't have the problem where "multiplying" by a nonzero number $n$ might make things $0$ if $p$ divides $n$, as can happen over characteristic $p$. But because $p$ is irreducible, it has no nontrivial divisors, so its gcd with any nonzero polynomial of smaller degree is $1$. Thus $\gcd(p, Dp) = 1$ and so $p$ is separable. Note that the only place we needed the characteristic 0 assumption here is in showing that $Dp$ is nonzero.

In characteristic $p$ this does not always hold: an irreducible polynomial may not be separable. Consider for instance $\F_p(t)$, the field of rational functions over $\F_p$. Then $D(x^p - t) = px^{p-1} - 0 = 0$, but if we adjoin a $p$th root of $t$ (i.e. look at the field extension $\F_p(t)/(x^p - t)$ ) then the polynomial turns out to be separable, as $(x - t^{1/p})^p = x^p - (t^{1/p})^p$ = $x^p - t$. 

Fields where every irreducible polynomial is separable are called "perfect". Any field with characteristic $0$ is separable, as we have seen, as is every finite field. The only non-perfect fields are infinite fields with characteristic $p$; the simplest example of such a field is just the field of rational functions $\F_p(t)$, which we already saw is not perfect. 

In fact, if $F$ is a field of characteristic $p$, $F$ is perfect if and only if the Frobenius map $a \to a^p$ is surjective. This is always a field homomorphism, and so is injective, but may not be surjective. If $F$ is finite then any injective map $F \to F$ is also surjective, so this theorem tells us why the finite fields are perfect. 

Let $\phi$ be the Frobenius map. For one direction, suppose $\phi$ is surjective, and let $f$ be an inseparable irreducible polynomial. 

## Separable Extensions
We can now define separability of extensions: a finite extension $F \subseteq K$ is separable if every element $c \in K$ has a separable minimal polynomial in $F[x]$. 

If $F$ is perfect, then any finite extension is automatically separable. Thus we have seen already that finite extensions of fields of characteristic $0$ and finite fields are separable. 

If our field is not perfect we can use conditions such as the following: letting $K$ be a finite extension of $F$, 
1) $K$ is separable if and only if 
2) $K$ is generated by elements $a_i$ ($K = F[a_1, \dots, a_n]$) which each have a separable minimal polynomial in $F[x]$; this in turn happens if and only if 
3) the number of $F$-embeddings of $K$ into the algebraic closure of $F$ (i.e. homomorphisms $K \to \ol{F}$ which are the identity on $F$) is equal to $[K : F]$. 
Note that when we say that $K$ is generated by $a_1, \dots, a_n$ we mean that we are allowed to take arbitrary polynomials of the $a_1, \dots, a_n$, like $a_1^2 + 2a_2$ and so on. It is not necessarily the case that the $a_i$ form a basis for $K$ over $F$. 

For an example of embeddings, let $F = \Q, K = \Q[\sqrt[3]{2}]$. Then we're looking for homomorphisms $K \to \ol{\Q}$ which fix $\Q$. For this to work it turns out that we need to send $\sqrt[3]{2}$ to another cube root of $2$; so it'll get sent to $\sqrt[3]{2}$ multiplied by some cube root of unity, and it turns out that those are the only possible embeddings. 

Proof: 1 -> 2 is easy: pick any generators (only need finitely many since $K$ is a finite extension), and since $K$ is a separable extension all of the generators will have separable minimal polynomials.

2 -> 3: let $K$ be generated by $a_1, \dots, a_n$, each with a separable minimal polynomial in $F[x]$, namely $p_i(x)$. Note that we have a tower of field extensions $F \subseteq F[a_1] \subseteq F[a_2] \subseteq \dots \subseteq F[a_1, \dots, a_n]$ taking us from $F$ to $K$. We will count the number of embeddings of each of these intermediate fields into $\ol{F}$ and use that. For convenience let $K_i = F[a_1, \dots, a_i]$. Then for instance $[K_1 : F] = \deg(p_1)$, as $K_1 = F[x]/(p_1)$. Now, $p_2$ may not be irreducible over $K_1$, but at least it will be a multiple of the minimal polynomial of $a_2$ in $K_1[x]$, say $\tilde{p_2}$. Thus $[K_2 : K_1] = \deg(\tilde{p_2}) \leq \deg(p_2)$. Then we can just keep repeating this process to find $[K_i : K_{i-1}]$ at each step. 

Now we return to the problem of counting embeddings. Any $F$-embedding of $K$ gives you $F$-embeddings of $K_i$, by just restricting the embedding to $K_i$; conversely by counting the embeddings of $F_i$ we can work our way up to the number of embeddings of $K$. The number of $F$-embeddings of $K_1$ is just $\deg(p_1$): any permutation of the roots of $p_1$ is an embedding of $K_1$, and since $p_1$ is separable it has $\deg(p_1)$ different roots. 

Now take an $F$-embedding $\phi_1$ of $K_1$. There are $\deg(\tilde{p_2})$ $K_1$-embeddings of $K_2$; if we want an $F$-embedding $\phi_2$ of $K_2$ we'll need to send elements $b$ of $K_1$ to $\phi_1(b)$, and a root of $\tilde{p_2}$ to a root of $\tilde{p_2}^{\phi_1}$ where that notation means "$\tilde{p_2}$ with $\phi_1$ applied to its coefficients". As it happens since $\phi_1$ is injective, the image of $\tilde{p_2}$ is another separable polynomial of the same degree, and so there are $\deg(\tilde{p_2})$ roots of $\tilde{p_2}^{\phi_1}$. Since there are $\deg(p_1)$ ways to choose a $\phi_1$ and $\deg(\tilde{p_2})$ ways to choose a $\phi_2$ given this $\phi_1$, there are $\deg(p_1)\deg(\tilde{p_2}) = [K_1 : F][K_2 : K_1] = [K_2 : F]$ $F$-embeddings of $K_2$. Then we can just continue inductively to end up with the total number of $F$-embeddings of $K$ being $[K_1:F][K_2:K_1]\dots[K:K_{n-1}]$ which, by the tower lemma, is $[K : F]$. 

3 -> 1: Suppose there is some $a \in K$ whose minimal polynomial $p_a(x) \in F[x]$ is not separable. Choose some more generators and make a tower $F \subseteq F[a] \subseteq F[a_2] \dots F[a, a_2, \dots, a_n]$. Then we can use the exact same argument to count embeddings, but now there will be strictly less than $\deg(p_a)$ $F$-embeddings of $F[a]$. Then we can go through the same steps as before to count the embeddings, but this will end up less than $[K : F]$. 
## More on Separability
Separability of polynomials is preserved under field homomorphisms. Letting $\phi$ be a ring homomorphism between fields $K$ and $L$, this gives a ring homomorphism $K[x] \to L[x]$ in the obvious way. We then have that, if $f(x) \in K[x]$ is separable, then $\phi(f(x))$ is separable (abusing notation to let $\phi$ also be the induced homomorphism $K[x] \to L[x]$). Proof: $f$ is separable if and only if $\Delta(f) \neq 0$. Note that $\Delta(\phi(f)) = \phi(\Delta(f))$; but since field homomorphisms are injective, $\phi(\Delta(f))$ must be nonzero as well. 

Irreducibility is also preserved under isomorphisms (though of course not homomorphisms: consider embedding into the algebraic closure): if $\phi$ is an isomorphism $K \to L$, then $f(x) \in K[x]$ is irreducible if and only if $\phi(f(x))$ is irreducible. For if $f(x)$ is irreducible but $\phi(f(x)) = g_1(x)g_2(x)$ where $g_1, g_2$ are not units, then $\phi^{-1}(g_1(x))\phi^{-1}(g_2(x)) = f(x)$, and since $\phi$ is an isomorphism non-units get taken to non-units, hence $\phi^{-1}(g_1(x))\phi^{-1}(g_2(x))$ is a factorization of $f$ into non-units. The other direction works the same. 


# Normal Extensions
A finite extension $F \subseteq K$ is normal if, for all $a \in K$, the minimal polynomial $p_a(x) \in F[x]$ factors completely in $K[x]$. Note that the other roots of $p_a(x)$ are called the "Galois conjugates" of $a$. 

Consider $\Q \subseteq \Q(\sqrt{3})$, which is a normal extension: $\sqrt{3}$ has minimal polynomial $x^2 - 3 = (x - \sqrt{3})(x + \sqrt{3})$, and the other root $-\sqrt{3}$ is also in $\Q(\sqrt{3})$. Indeed a similar argument holds in general: the minimal polynomial of $a + b\sqrt{3}$ with nonzero $b$ has as its other root $a - b\sqrt{3}$ which is also in $\Q(\sqrt{3})$. On the other hand $\Q(\sqrt[3]{3})$ is not a normal extension of $\Q$, because the minimal polynomial $x^3 - 3$ has complex roots and does not split over $\Q(\sqrt[3]{3})$, all of whose elements are real. 

Actually every degree 2 extension is normal. For if $F \subseteq K$ is a degree 2 extension then $1, a, a^2$ is linearly dependent for any $a \in K - F$ and so $a$ is a root of some quadratic polynomial in $F[x]$. We know $p_a(x) = (x - a)q(x)$ for some quotient $q(x) \in F[x]$, but $q(x)$ must have degree $1$, so in fact $p_a(x) = (x - a)(x - b)$ and so $p_a$ splits completely. 

As another example consider the extension $\Q \subseteq \Q[e^{2\pi i/n}]$; its minimal polynomial is some divisor of $x^n - 1$, but in fact the roots of that are the $n$th roots of unity, which are powers of $e^{2\pi i/n}$, and thus already in $\Q[e^{2\pi i/n}]$. The minimal polynomial is just a product of some of these factors and so also splits over  $\Q[e^{2\pi i/n}]$; thus this is a normal extension. 

# Splitting Fields
Implicit in much of the work on separable and normal extensions is the idea of a splitting field. Letting $f(x) \in F[x]$, an extension $K$ of $F$ is a splitting field for $f$ if $f(x)$ factors completely into linear factors in $K[x]$, and $K$ is "as small as possible"--if $f$ factors as $c(x - a_1)\cdots (x - a_n)$, then in fact $K = F[a_1, \dots, a_n]$. 

## Constructing Splitting Fields
One way to construct a splitting field is to look at the algebraic closure of $F$, find the roots $a_1, \dots, a_n$ of the minimal polynomial in $\ol{F}$ , and then take $K = F[a_1, \dots, a_n]$. (It might be possible to generate $K$ without adjoining all those roots--e.g. the splitting field of $x^2 + 1$ over $\Q$ can be written $\Q[i, -i]$ but that's just $\Q[i]$). 

Another way is to factor $f$ into irreducible elements $\pi_1(x)\cdots \pi_k(x)$, where each $\pi_i(x)$ is in $F[x]$. Then do the following: first consider $K_1 = F[y]/(\pi_1(y))$; $\pi_1$  now has a root in $K_1$, namely $\ol{y}$. So $\pi_1(x) = (x - \ol{y})q(x)$, where $q$ may be irreducible or not. Then just repeat the process; look at the factorization of $f(x)$ in $K_1[x]$, quotient by one of the irreducible factors to get another root, and end up with a new field $K_2$. This process terminates because at each step you find a new root of $f$ in some field and $f$ has at most $\deg(f)$ of those. 

This second way looks weirder but is often easier to work with over general fields, where the algebraic closure may be a very strange object--not necessarily finite-dimensional over the base field, etc. 

## Uniqueness of Splitting Fields
If $K, K'$ are splitting fields extensions of a field $F$ for some polynomial $f(x) \in F[x]$, then there exists an $F$-isomorphism $K \to K'$ (i.e. a field isomorphism that is the identity on $F$). 

The proof works by doing the second splitting-field construction from above and, at every step, constructing a homomorphism between the fields we build along the way. Let $K = F[a_1, \dots, a_n], K' = F[b_1, \dots, b_n]$. Now let $K_1 = F[a_1]$, which is isomorphic to $F[y]/(p_1(y))$ where $p_1$ is the minimal polynomial of $a_1$ in $F$. We can then construct an $F$-embedding $\phi_1: K_1 \to K'$. All we need to do is send $\ol{y}$ to any root of $p_1(x)$, viewed as a polynomial in $K'[x]$, and then extend linearly to an $F$-embedding. Since $p_1$ divides $f(x)$, any of its roots are roots of $f(x)$, and some subset of the roots of $f(x)$ is the roots of $p_1(x)$. So one of the $\beta_i$ works and we can just pick that. Letting $K_1' \subseteq K'$ be the image of $\phi_1$, we then have that $K_1$ is isomorphic to $K_1'$. 

Now we go onto the next step: factor $f(x)$ in $K_1[x]$ into irreducibles (over $K_1[x]$) $\pi_1(x)\pi_2(x)\cdots \pi_k(x) = f(x)$. Then if we apply $\phi_1$ to both sides we get $\phi_1(\pi_1)\cdots \phi_1(\pi_k) = f(x)$--the right-hand side is unaffected because $\phi_1$, as an $F$-embedding, is the identity on $F$. 

If all of the $\pi_i$ are linear, we can stop: we then have that $K_1' = K', K_1 = K$, and so $K$ is isomorphic to $K'$ since $K_1$ is isomorphic to $K_1'$. Otherwise, pick an irreducible (say WLOG $\pi_1$) that is not a linear factor, and let $K_2 = K_1[y](\pi_1(y)) = K_1[\alpha_2]$, say. (Could be some other $\alpha_i$ but we can renumber them as we like.) Then we construct an $F$-embedding $\phi_2: K_1[\alpha_2] \to K'$ extending $\phi_1$: send $\ol{y}$ to any root of $\phi_1(\pi_1(x))$, which works for much the same reason as before. Then the image of $\phi_2(K_2)$ is some subfield $K_2'$ of $K'$ which is isomorphic to $K_2$. Then we repeat until done; once $f$ factors completely, say after $n$ steps, we stop and are left with an isomorphism $K_n \to K_n'$ which is also an isomorphism $K \to K'$ since $K_n = K, K_n' = K'$. 

As a related fact, if we have a $F$-isomorphism $\phi: K \to K'$ and $K$ is a splitting field, then so is $K'$ (and the converse: $K'$ being a splitting field implies that $K$ is too). For if $f(x) = c(x - a_1)\cdots (x - a_n) \in K[x]$, then $f(x) = \phi(f(x))$, because $\phi$ is the identity on $F$, but $\phi$ does affect the factorization, changing it into $\phi(c)(x - \phi(a_1))\cdots (x - \phi(a_n))$, which is thus a factorization of $f$ over $K'$. Also, since $K = F[a_1, \dots, a_n]$, every $a \in K$ is equal to some polynomial in the $a_i$, $p(a_1, \dots, a_n)$, then any $\phi(a) \in K'$ (which covers all elements of $K'$ since $\phi$ is an isomorphism) equal to $p(\phi(a_1), \dots, \phi(a_n))$, and so $K'$ is generated by $\phi(a_1), \dots, \phi(a_n)$, which are the roots of $f$ over $K'$. Thus $K'$ is indeed a splitting field for $f$. 

## Splitting Fields and Normal Extensions
Let $F \subseteq K$ be a finite extension. Then the following are equivalent: 

1) $K$ is a normal extension of $F$.
2) $K$ is a splitting field for some $f(x) \in F[x]$.
3) All $F$-embeddings $K \to \ol{F}$ have the same image. 
(Recall that $K$ is normal if, for all $a \in K$, the minimal polynomial of $a$ over $F$ splits completely in $K$. In other words, for any element in $K$, all of its Galois conjugates are in $K$ too.)
The second criterion us most useful for proving that something is normal, but the first criterion has more useful consequences. 

Proof: For 1 -> 2, since $K$ is a finite extension we have $K = F[a_1, \dots, a_n]$ for some generators $a_i$. Let $p_i \in F[x]$ be the minimal polynomial of $a_i$, then let $f(x) = p_1(x) \cdots p_n(x) \in F[x]$. $K$ turns out to be a splitting field for $f$: by normality of $K$ , each $p_i$ splits completely in $K[x]$, and so $f$ splits completely over $K$ (one property of a splitting field). Also, $K$ is by definition generated by some roots of $f$, namely the $a_i$, which is the other defining property of a splitting field. Thus $K$ is a splitting field for $f(x)$. 

For 2 -> 3, let $K$ be a splitting field extension of $F$ for some polynomial $f(x) \in F[x]$. Note that in $\ol{F}[x]$, $f$ factors completely as $f(x) = c(x - b_1)\cdots (x - b_d)$ where all the $b_i$ are in $\ol{F}$. Letting $L = F[b_1, \dots, b_d]$, we have that $L$ is a subfield of $\ol{F}$ and is a splitting field for $f$. Of course $f$ also splits completely as $e(x - a_1)\cdots (x - a_n)$ and so $K = F[a_1, \dots, a_n]$.  We know how to construct $F$-embeddings in situations like these: any $F$-embedding $\phi: K \to \ol{F}$ must send each $a_i$ to a root of $f$ in $\ol{F}$, i.e. must send each $a_i$ to some $b_j$. (because the minimal polynomial $p_i$ of $a_i$ divides $f$) Therefore all the images of $F$-embeddings of $K$ must be inside $L$. But since $L$ is a splitting field of $f$ it is isomorphic to $K$, and so the degree of $K$ is equal to the degree of $L$, i.e. $\dim(K) = \dim(L)$, which then implies $\phi(K) = L$ because any $F$-embedding $K \to L$ is $F$-linear and injective. 

Finally, for 3 -> 1, suppose that all $F$-embeddings $K \to \ol{F}$ have the same image $L \subseteq \ol{F}$. Let $\phi_0$ be an $F$-embedding $K \to L$ with $\psi$ being the inverse isomorphism.  Then for any $a \in K$ let $p_a(x) \in F[x]$ be its minimal polynomial; $p_a(x)$ must factor completely in $\ol{F}$. There exists an $F$-embedding $\phi_a : K \to \ol{F}$ sending $a$ to any of its roots in $\ol{F}$ (say $p_a(x) = (x - b_1)\cdots (x - b_d) \in \ol{F}[x]$). We then know that $\beta_i \in L$ for any $i$, because the image of $\phi_a$ is $L$. Applying $\psi$ to $p_a(x)$ we then get $p_a(x) = (x - \psi(b_1))\cdots (x - \psi(b_d))$ where each $\psi(b_i)$ is in $K$. Thus $p_a$ splits completely over $K$. Since this holds for the minimal polynomial of any element $a \in K$, $K$ is a normal extension. 
# Galois Extensions
A (finite, algebraic) field extension $F \subseteq K$ is a Galois extension if it is separable and normal. We then have that the following are equivalent, for any finite algebraic extension $K$:

1) $F \subseteq K$ is Galois
2) $[K : F] = |\text{Aut}_F(K)|$ 
3) The set of all $\alpha \in K$, such that for all $g \in \text{Aut}_F(K), g(\alpha) = \alpha$, is $F$.  In other words no $F$-automorphisms of $K$ fix anything outside of $F$. (This set, called the "fixed field", is always a subfield of $K$, but may not be equal to $F$, in the case where $K$ is not Galois)
For 1 -> 2, separability means we have $[K : F]$ different $F$-embeddings of $K$ into $\ol{F}$, all with the same image $L$. They are all injective (being ring homomorphisms between fields that aren't the zero map), hence bijective onto their image $L$, hence they are isomorphisms $K \to L$ that preserve $F$, and so can be thought of in a natural way as being $F$-automorphisms of $K$. Thus there $[K : F]$ $F$-automorphisms of $K$. 

For 2 -> 3, call this set $F'$; note first (prove this) that this is a field. It includes $F$, since of course any $F$-automorphism of $K$ fixes $F$. Note also that $|\text{Aut}_F(K)| = [K : F] = [K : F'][F' : F]$. Now consider $\text{Aut}_{F'}$; we claim that this has at most $[K : F']$ elements.... eventually we have that $\text{Aut}_F(K) = \text{Aut}_{F'}(K)$, and from there that $[F' : F] = 1$, and so that $F' = F$. 

For 3 -> 1, choose any $a \in K$, and consider $S = \{g(\alpha) \mid g \in \text{Aut}_F(K)\}$. This is a subset of $K$ but not necessarily a field; indeed it will be a finite set, since that automorphism group is a finite group (we know as much even if we don't know that it has exactly $[K : F]$ elements). Now let $P(x) = \prod_{b \in S}(x - b)$. If we pass everything through $f \in$ Aut$_F(K)$, we get $\prod_{b \in S} (x - f(b))$, which is in fact just equal to $p(x)$, since applying $f$ to all the elements of $\text{Aut}_F(K)$ just permutes them, and so the set of elements of the form $fg(\alpha)$ with $g$ in the automorphism group is actually just $S$. This shows that $p(x)$ is fixed by $\Aut_F(K)$, hence $p(x) \in F[x]$ and $p$ is separable, and since the same is true for any $\alpha$, the whole field extension $K$ is a separable extension. Since $K$ is the splitting field of $p$ it is normal, too. 

Now we show a property of "intermediate fields" of Galois extensions, namely that if $F \subseteq L \subseteq K$ is a tower of field extensions and $K$ is a Galois extension of $F$, then $K$ is a Galois extension of $L$. (On the other hand $L$ may not be a Galois extension of $F$.) Proof: for any $a \in K$ we have that the minimal polynomial over $F$, $P_F(\alpha)$, is separable. Note also that $P_L(\alpha)$ divides $P_F(\alpha)$, and so is a separable polynomial. Hence all irreducible polynomials over $L$ split in $K$....

For a counterexample where $L$ is not a Galois extension of $F$, consider $\Q \subseteq \Q(\sqrt[3]{2}) \subseteq \Q(\sqrt[3]{2}, \omega)$. We know that in fact $\Q(\sqrt[3]{2})$ has only one $\Q-$automorphism and so is not Galois (this is downstream of it not being separable). 

## Galois Extensions in Finite Fields
Any extension between finite fields is automatically Galois. Proof: let $F \subseteq K$ both be finite (of course this forces $K$ to be a finite extension of $F$, and both $F$ and $K$ will have characteristic $p$). We know that $F = (\F_p)^n$, so $|F| = p^n$. Similarly $K$ is a finite-dimensional vector space over $F$, so $K = F^m = (p^n)^m = p^{nm}$. Thus as long as both of these are nontrivial extensions of their base field, $K$'s order will be a *composite* power of $p$. 

With this in mind, we can begin verifying that $K$ is separable and normal. Recall that $K$ is separable if and only if the Frobenius map is surjective, and that this is automatically true since $K$ is finite. For normality, we claim that for all $a \in K$, we have $a^{p^{nm}} = a$. Recall that the multiplicative group of $K$ has order $p^{nm - 1}$, hence $a^{p^{nm} - 1} = 1$ by Lagrange's theorem, hence $a^{p^{nm}} = a$. Thus every element of $K$ is a root of $x^{p^{nm}} - x$, and nothing else is a root of that (b/c it has at most $p^{nm}$ roots). This lives in $F[x]$; thus $K$ is the splitting field of $x^{p^{nm}} - x$, and so is automatically normal. 

As a corollary we then get that the other properties of Galois extensions hold for any extensions in finite fields: the order of the automorphism group equals the degree of the extension, and the fixed field of the automorphism group is just $F$. 

We can also give some examples to see these consequences more directly. For instance, while the Frobenius map $\phi(x) = x^p$ itself may not fix $F$ (though it does fix $\F^p$ ), the composition $\phi^n(x) = x^{p^n}$ is an automorphism of $K$ that fixes $F$. We then have that $\phi^n, \phi^{2n}, \dots, \phi^{mn}$ are all distinct $F$-automorphisms of $K$ (note that $\phi^{nm}$ is just the identity on $K$), and since $[K : F] = m$ these must be the only $F$-automorphisms. Thus the group $\Aut_F(K)$ is isomorphic to $\Z/m\Z$. 
## Cyclotomic Extensions
Letting $\zeta_n$ be the principal $n$th root of unity, $e^{2\pi i/n}$, we have that $\Q \subseteq \Q[\zeta_n]$ is Galois. Separability follows immediately since every field of characteristic $0$ is perfect; normality follows from the fact that it is the splitting field of $x^n - 1$. (The powers $\zeta_n, \zeta_n^2, \dots, \zeta_n^n$, the last of which is $1$, are all in $\Q(\zeta_n)$, are all distinct, and are all roots of $x^n - 1$--hence they are precisely the roots of $x^n - 1$.) 

Finding the degree would be hard if not for the fact that we know it's equal to $|\Aut(\Q[\zeta_n])|$. It suffices to choose what $\zeta_n$ gets sent to; this must be another root of the minimal polynomial of $\zeta_n$--not any root of $x^n - 1$. But the roots of the minimal polynomial are the powers $\zeta_n^k$ where $\gcd(k, n) = 1$. Note that $x^n - 1$ is separable, as can be calculated by looking at the formal derivative. Assume for the sake of contradiction that $f$, the minimal polynomial of $\zeta_n$, and $g$, the minimal polynomial of $\zeta_n^k$, are distinct. Then since $x^n - 1$ is separable we can factor it as $f(x)g(x)h(x) \in \Z[x]$ . First assume that $k$ is a prime $p$ which does not divide $n$. Reducing everything mod $p$ we get $x^n - \ol{1} = \ol{f}(x)\ol{g}(x)\ol{h}(x)$. Note that $\zeta_n$ is a root of $g(x^p)$, (thought of as an integer polynomial), since $\zeta_n^p$ is a root of $g$. Thus $f(x) \mid g(x^p)$, and so $\ol{f}(x) \mid \ol{g}(x^p)$. But this is equal to $\ol{g}(x)^p$ by the Frobenius map, hence $\ol{f}(x) \mid \ol{g}(x)^p$. But this means that in fact $\ol{f}, \ol{g}$ have a common factor in $\F_p[x]$, which is a contradiction: $x^n - \ol{1}$ is separable in $\F_p$ since $p$ does not divide $n$ (add proof later). 

More generally, if $k$ is coprime to $n$, we can factor it into primes $p_1p_2\cdots p_n$, none of which divide $n$. We can run the same argument as before to show that $\zeta_n$ has the same minimal polynomial as $\zeta_n^{p_1}$, that $\zeta_n^{p_1}$ has the same polynomial as $\zeta_n^{p_1p_2}$, and so on, all the way up to $\zeta_n$ having the same minimal polynomial as $\zeta_n^k$. Thus the roots of the minimal polynomial of $\zeta_n$ are the powers $\zeta_n^k$ where $\gcd(n, k) = 1$, and so it has degree $\phi(n)$; thus $[\Q[\zeta_n] : \Q] = \phi(n)$. (A rewording of this: the $n$th cyclotomic polynomial $\Phi_n$ is equal to $\prod_{k:\gcd(k, n = 1), 0 < k < n} (x - \zeta_n^k)$.) Note that the automorphism group is isomorphic to $(\Z/n\Z)^\times$, the multiplicative group of units in $\Z/n\Z$. We also have that $x^n - 1 = \prod_{d \mid n} \phi_d(x)$. 

# Primitive Element Theorem
A "simple" extension is one generated by adjoining a single element: say $F \subseteq K$ with $K = F[a]$. Such a generator is called a "primitive element". In fact, any finite separable extension has a single primitive element. 

First we consider the case where $F$ is infinite. We show first that, given some conditions on $t$, we have $F[a, b] = F[a + tb]$, where $t \in F$. (More precisely we know that all but finitely many elements work.) Once we know this, we can use induction: reducing $F[a_1, a_2, \dots, a_n]$ to $F[a_1 + ta_2, \dots, a_n]$ and so on until we have that $F$ is generated by something of the form $a_1 + t_2a_2 + \dots + t_na_n$. 

What would it mean for $t$ not to work? Just that $F[a + tb]$ is strictly contained in $F[a, b]$. (It's always contained in $F[a, b]$, but may not be equal to it.) Note that whatever $t$ is, $F[a + tb]$ is separable, since $F[a, b]$ is separable. From this we know that there are $[F[a, b] : F[a + tb]]$ embeddings of $F[a, b]$ into the algebraic closure $\Omega$. of $F[a + tb]$ which preserve $F[a + tb]$. Since the two extensions are not equal, this degree must be at least two, hence there are at least two such embeddings. Let $\phi_1, \phi_2$ be two such embeddings. If $\phi_1(b) = \phi_2(b)$, then because $\phi_1(a + tb) = \phi_2(a + tb)$ (just from the requirement that the $\phi$s preserve $F[a + tb]$), we know that in fact $\phi_1(a) = \phi_2(a)$, since $\phi_1(a) + t\phi_1(b) = \phi_2(a) + t\phi_2(b) = \phi_2(a) + t\phi_1(b)$. This then implies that $\phi_1 = \phi_2$. Thus if $\phi_1, \phi_2$ are different functions, we know that $\phi_1(b)$ must not equal $\phi_2(b)$. With this in mind, return to the equation $\phi_1(a) + t\phi_1(b) = \phi_2(a) + t\phi_2(b)$. We get that $t = \frac{\phi_1(a) - \phi_2(a)}{\phi_2(b) - \phi_1(b)}$, and since $\phi_1(b) \neq \phi_2(b)$ we can divide by their differences. Since there are only finitely many embeddings (FILL IN DETAIL) there are only finitely many "bad" values of $t$. Thus there must be some choice of $t$ that works, and so $F[a + tb] = F[a, b]$. Then, by the discussion above, this implies that any finite extension has a primitive element. 

Now suppose $F$ is finite. Then $K$ is also finite, and we know that its multiplicative group $K^\times$ is cyclic, with a generator $a$. Then of course $K = F[a]$, i.e. $a$ works as a primitive element. 
# Galois Correspondence
## The Fundamental Theorem
Associated with any finite extension $F \subseteq K$ is a poset of "intermediate fields", i.e. fields with $F \subseteq L \subseteq K$. The "fundamental theorem of Galois theory" says that, if $K$ is a Galois extension of $F$, then this poset of intermediate fields is isomorphic to the poset of subgroups of $\Aut_F(K)$. (Note that this isomorphism will be "orientation-reversing"; if $L_1 \subseteq L_2$ and $G_1, G_2$ are the corresponding subgroups then $G_2$ is a subgroup of $G_1$.) 

Proof: given some subfield $L$, let $H$ be $\Aut_L(K)$, the automorphisms of $K$ that fix $L$. Any such automorphism fixes $F$ as well, hence $H$ is a subgroup of $G = \Aut_F(K)$. Thus to each intermediate field $L$ there is associated a unique subgroup $H$. 

Conversely, let $H$ be some subgroup of $G$, and let $K^H$ be the "fixed field" of $H$ in $K$, the set of all $a \in K$ with $h(a) = a$ for all $h \in H$, which is a subfield of $K$. 

Note that if we take the whole group $\Aut_F(K)$, the corresponding subfield is $F$; we really need the fact that $K$ is a Galois extension for this, since one equivalent condition of being Galois is that no $F$-automorphisms fix anything outside of $F$. 

All we have left to prove is that these two procedures, the one for going from fields to groups and the one that goes the other way around, are actually inverses. First let $L$ be an intermediate field, $F \subseteq L \subseteq K$. We have defined the corresponding subgroup to be $H = \Aut_L(K) \subseteq \Aut_F(K) = G$, and defined the subfield corresponding to $H$ to be the fixed field $K^H$. Now we need to prove that in fact $K^H = L$. But since $K$ is a Galois extension of $L$, this fixed field is just $K$. 

For the other direction, starting with a subgroup $H$, let $L$ be the corresponding subgroup $K^H$. Then by definition the corresponding subgroup to this is $\Aut_L(K)$, and so we want to prove that $\Aut_{K^H}(K) = H$. Certainly $H \subseteq \Aut_{K^H}(K)$. Now we prove that the groups are equal by showing that they have the same size. By the primitive element theorem, $K = K^H[a]$ for some $a \in K$. Let $p_a(x) \in K^H[a]$ be the minimal polynomial of $a$; its degree is $[K : K^H]$. Now let $q(x) = \prod_{h \in H}(x - h(a))$. This is a polynomial with coefficients in $K$, at least; actually it has coefficients in $K^H$, since if we apply any element $h'$ to it we get $\prod_{h \in H} (x - h'h(a)) = \prod_{h \in H} (x - h(a))$, and so $q(x)$ is fixed by any element of $H$. Since $q(x) \in K^H[a]$ and $a$ is a root of $q$, the minimal polynomial $p_a(x)$ divides $q$. Thus $\deg(p_a) \leq \deg(q)$, but $\deg(p_a) = [K^H : K] = |\Aut_{K^H}(K)|$ while $\deg(Q) = |H|$. Thus $H \subseteq \Aut_{K^H}(K)$ and $|\Aut_{K^H}(K)| \leq |H|$, so in fact $H = \Aut_{K^H}(K)$. 
## Index of a Subgroup = Degree of a Field
Let $L$ be an intermediate field of $F \subseteq K$ (a Galois extension) and let $H \subseteq G$ be its corresponding subgroup; then $[L : F] = [G : H]$. Proof: we know that $[L : F] = [K : F]/[K : L]$ by the tower lemma. Since $F \subseteq K$ and $L \subseteq K$ are both Galois, the numerator and denominator equal $|G|$ and $|H|$ respectively, and so $[L : F] = |G|/|H| = [G : H]$. 

The same statement holds when we're working with different intermediate fields: given $L_1 \subseteq L_2$ with corresponding subgroups $H_1 \supseteq H_2$, we have $[L_2 : L_1] = [H_1 : H_2]$. This is proven in much the same way using the tower $[K : L_2][L_2 : L_1] = [K : L_1]$ and the fact that $K$ is a Galois extension of $L_1$ and of $L_2$. 

## Galois Groups Acting on Subfields and Subgroups
The Galois group $\Aut_F(K)$ acts transitively on the roots of $p_a(x)$ where $a$ is any element of $K$ not in $F$. It also acts on the set of all intermediate fields of $F \subseteq K$, with the operation given by $g \cdot L = g(L)$, since if $L$ is an intermediate field of  $F \subseteq K$ so is $g(L)$, by virtue of $g$ being an $F$-automorphism. Finally, $G$ acts on the set of all subgroups of $G$ by conjugation. 

A general definition about group actions: let $G$ act on two sets $X$, $Y$. A "$G$-map" $X \to Y$ is a function $f$ with $f(g \cdot x) = g \cdot f(x)$. The punchline: we know that the Galois group $G$ acts on both intermediate fields of $F \subseteq K$ and subgroups of $G$ itself; it turns out that the Galois correspondence is a $G$-map. That is to say, let $L$ be an intermediate field and $H$ be its corresponding subgroup; then for any $g \in G$, we have that $g(L)$ is the intermediate field corresponding to $gHg^{-1}$. Proof: we need to show, essentially, that $K^{gHg^{-1}} = g(K^H)$. The thing on the RHS is a subset of the thing on the LHS: if $a \in K^H$, then $ghg^{-1}(g(a)) = gh(a) = g(a)$ (since $h(a) = a$ because $a$ is in the fixed field). Thus $g(a)$ is fixed by any element of $gHg^{-1}$. Both sides of the equation we want to prove are fields with the same dimension over $F$, so if one is the subset of the other they must just be the same.  Since the correspondence respects the action in one direction and is a bijection, it respects the action in the other direction as well. 

### Normal Subgroups Correspond to Normal Extensions
As a corollary of the above, if $F \subseteq L \subseteq K$ is such that $L$ is a normal extension of $F$, then the corresponding subgroup $H \subseteq G$ will be normal, and vice versa. For, if $H$ is a normal subgroup, then $gHg^{-1} = H$ for all $g$, i.e. $H$ is fixed by the $G$-action. By the result above, this happens if and only if $g(L) = L$ for all $g$. ($g$ may not act on the identity on $L$, but it does keep elements of $L$ within $L$.) That fact then lets us restrict any element of $\Aut_F(K)$'s domain to $L$ and so we have a homomorphism $\Aut_F(K) \to \Aut_F(L)$. The kernel of this is $\Aut_L(K)$, and it its surjective, for by the image of this homomorphism is $\Aut_F(K)/\Aut_L(K) = G/H$, which has $[K : F]/[K : L] = [L : F]$ elements, and $\Aut_F(L)$ always has at most $[L : F]$ elements, with equality if and only if $F \subseteq L$ is Galois. Since equality is achieved, $L$ is a Galois extension of $F$, and so is normal. 

For the other direction, suppose $F \subseteq L$ is Galois. The primitive element theorem implies that $L = F[a]$ for some $a \in L$. Since this is a Galois extension, $L$ contains all conjugates of $a$, i.e. all the roots of $p_a(x)$ with $\deg(p_a) = [L : F]$. Any $g \in \Aut_F(K)$ must send $a$ to another root of this polynomial, so $g(L)$ is a subset of $L$, but $\dim_F(g(L)) = \dim_F(L)$, so they're the same and $g(L) = L$. 

# Applications
## Straightedge and Compass Constructions
Start out with points at $(0, 0)$ and $(1, 0)$; these are already constructed. With a straightedge and compass, we can draw a line between any two constructed points and draw a circle centered at any constructed point, with radius given by the distance to another constructed point. Any intersections of two lines, two circles, or a line and a circle are also considered constructed points, and can be used for future operations. 

Some less basic operations that can be done with the above: all the integers can be constructed by repeatedly using circles of radius $1$; on a line segment between two points, the perpendicular bisector can be drawn; angles can be bisected; given a point and a line, draw a line parallel to the given line. 

We can reframe all of this in terms of constructing numbers rather than points: using the given "0" and "1" points, we can build coordinate axes, and think of the plane as being the complex plane. A complex number whose corresponding point in the plane is constructible using the basic "moves" above is called constructible. Call the set of all constructible complex numbers $E$. 

$E$ contains all integers and all Gaussian integers, since you can construct the coordinate axes to get all the pure real and imaginary numbers, and then draw perpendicular bisectors like graph paper to get all the elements of $\Z[i]$. We can also get all the rational numbers $a/b$. Construct $a$ on the imaginary axis, $b$ on the real axis, and draw a line between them; then draw a line passing through $1$ parallel to this line. By similarity the ratio between the two sides of the new triangle will also be $a/b$, so it must intersect the imaginary axis at $a/b$. We can construct the sum $a + b$ of constructible real numbers $a, b$: draw a circle of radius $a$ about $b$. We can also construct the product $ab$ of any real $a, b \in E$: draw $a$ on the imaginary axis, $b$ on the real axis, draw a line from $1$ to $a$, and then draw the line parallel to it passing through $b$; the resulting triangle will have leg lengths $b$ and $ab$. Given any complex $a \in E$, we can construct its absolute value $|a|$ by drawing the circle from $0$ to $a$ and seeing where it intersects the real axis. We can also construct its real and imaginary parts by dropping perpendiculars to the axes. With all this we can multiply arbitrary complex constructible numbers, $w, z \in E$. For if $w = a +bi$ and $z = c + di$ then $wz = (ac - bd) + (ad + bc)i$; $a, b, c, d$ are all constructible, so are their products by the result above, and so are the sums of those, by the results above. (As a corollary, you can add angles). All this implies that $E$ is a subfield of $\C$: it contains $0$ and $1$ by assumption, we showed that it is closed under addition (add the real and complex parts separately), closed under multiplication, contains negations of all elements, and contains multiplicative inverses of all its elements (since $z/w = z\ol{w}/w\ol{w} = z\ol{w}/|w|^2$; complex conjugates and squares of norms are constructible, since $|w|^2$ is real its reciprocal is constructible by a construction from above, and then we can just multiply the real part and complex part of $z\ol{w}$ separately by $1/|w|^2$. 

You can also construct the square roots of constructible numbers. Letting $z = re^{i\theta}$ be constructible, $e^{i\theta / 2}$ is constructible by bisecting angles, $r$ is constructible because absolute values are constructible, and $\sqrt{r}$ is constructible by the following construction: draw a circle with diameter on the real axis which meets the real axis at $0$ and $r + 1$. Draw a line parallel to the complex axis, passing through $1$, and draw a right triangle with legs between $0$ and ....

All constructible numbers can be obtained from $\Q[i]$, which is easy to construct, using only the four basic operations, taking real and imaginary parts, absolute values, and square roots. Here we take real and imaginary parts of everything involved and so will work just with real numbers.  The only ways to get new points are by intersecting two lines, a line and a circle, or two circles. In the first case, the lines are of the form $ax + by = c$ where $a, b, c$ are all constructible, and the intersection of two such lines, as the solution of a linear system whose coefficients are all constructible, can be gotten just using the four basic operations on constructible numbers. The intersections of a line and a circle come from solving a quadratic with constructible coefficients. This can then be solved using only basic operations and square roots. For intersecting circles, if we subtract the equations of one circle from another, we get the equation of a line passing through their points of intersection, and the problem then reduces to finding intersections between that line and one of the circles. 

A corollary of all this: if $a \in E$, then constructing $E$ involves building a tower of field extensions $\Q \subseteq K_1 \subseteq K_2 \subseteq \dots \subseteq K_n$ where $a \in K_n$. For each of these intermediate fields we have $[K_i : K_{i-1}] = 2$, because elements in the bigger field are solutions of quadratics in the smaller field. Thus the degree of any constructible element $a$ over $\Q$ is a power of $2$, by the tower lemma. Thus, for instance, the fact that we can construct the regular pentagon with straightedge and compass implies that $\zeta_5$ can be expressed with the basic operations and nested square roots, and it turns out to be $\frac{-1 + \sqrt{5}}{4} + \frac{i}{2}\sqrt{\frac{5 + \sqrt{5}}{2}}$. 

By the Galois correspondence, this means that, if $\Q \subseteq K$, $G = \Aut_\Q(K)$, and there is a sequence of subgroups $\{e\} = H_n \subseteq \dots \subseteq H_1 \subseteq G$ with $[H_i : H_{i+1}] = 2$ for all $i$, then $K \subseteq E$. 

We can now prove, for instance, that the regular $17$-gon is constructible. As long as we can construct $\zeta_{17}$ we can construct the whole $17$-gon, constructing all other vertices by taking powers of $\zeta_{17}$. $\Q[\zeta_{17}]$ has degree $16$ over $\Q$, which makes it at least a candidate for constructibility. We still need to find a chain of subfields with the right degrees, which by the above can be done by finding a chain of subgroups of the Galois group $(\Z/17\Z)^\times = C_{16}$. But $C_{16}$ has a subgroup isomorphic to $C_8$--say, if $C_{16} = \langle x \rangle$ then $\langle x^2 \rangle$ has $8$ elements--and there's a subgroup of that isomorphic to $C_4$, a subgroup of that isomorphic to $C_2$, and then we're done. 

More generally, if $p$ is a prime of the form $2^n + 1$ then $\zeta_p$, and so the regular $p$-gon, is constructible. For the Galois group of $\zeta_p$ is then isomorphic to $C_{2^n}$, which has a chain of subgroups $C_{2^i}$. Even more generally, any extension of $\Q$ whose Galois group has size $2^n$ is a subfield of the constructible numbers. 

## Solvability by Radicals
Constructibility can be expressed in terms of properties of the Galois group; so can expressibility by radicals. A number $a \in \C$ can be "expressed in radicals" if it can be written using the four basic operations and $n$th roots on rational numbers. This turns out to correspond to the condition that the Galois group of some extension $\Q \subseteq K$ with $a \in K$ is "solvable". In general a group $G$ is solvable if there exists a chain $\{e\} \subseteq H_n \subseteq \dots H_1 \subseteq H_0 = G$ where each $H_{i+1} \subseteq H_i$ is a normal subgroup and $H_i/H_{i+1}$ is abelian. Actually we can, without loss of generality, replace this with the condition that $H_i/H_{i+1}$ is cyclic, basically just because an abelian group is always a product of cyclic groups. 
### Kummer's Theorem
As a preliminary to all this, we will consider Galois extensions with cyclic Galois groups. We have the following result about them: let $F \subseteq K$ be a Galois extension where $F$ contains a primitive $n$th root of unity, call it $\zeta_n$. Then $K = F[\sqrt[n]{a}]$ for some $a \in F$ if and only if $\Aut_F(K)$ is isomorphic to $C_d$ where $d \mid n$. 

Proof: for one direction, suppose $K = F[\sqrt[n]{a}]$. Note that we get the same field by instead adjoining $\zeta\sqrt[n]{a}$ for any $n$th root of unity $\zeta$. Define a group homomorphism $\phi: \Aut_F(K) \to C_n = \langle \zeta_n \rangle$ that sends an automorphism $g$ to $g(\sqrt[n]{a})/\sqrt[n]{a}$. Regardless of which $n$th root of $a$ we use, we get the same homomorphism, so don't worry about that being ill-defined. $g$ must take $\sqrt[n]{a}$ to another root of $x^n - a$, and those are all products of $\sqrt[n]{a}$ and an $n$th root of unity, so dividing the result by $\sqrt[n]{a}$ gets us an $n$th root of unity. Thus $\phi$ is indeed a function from $\Aut_F(K)$ to $\langle \zeta_n \rangle$. Now we prove that it is a homomorphism. Letting $e$ be the identity in $\Aut_F(K)$ we have $\phi(e) = e(\sqrt[n]{a})/\sqrt[n]{a} = \sqrt[n]{a}/\sqrt[n]{a} = 1$. Also, for any $g_1, g_2 \in \Aut_F(K)$ we have $\phi(g_1g_2) = (g_1 \circ g_2)(\sqrt[n]{a})/\sqrt[n]{a}$. We can rewrite this as $\frac{g_1(g_2(\sqrt[n]{a})}{g_2(\sqrt[n]{a})} \cdot \frac{g_2\sqrt[n]{a}}{\sqrt[n]{a}}$, since the $g_2(\sqrt[n]{a})$ in the numerator and denominator cancel. But then .... Note that $\phi$ is also injective, so $\Aut_F(K)$ is isomorphic to some subgroup of $C_n$, and this is equal to $C_d$ where $d \mid n$. 

Now we handle the other direction. Given only the Galois group, we'll need to find some element in $F$ with the required properties. For this we will need some lemmas. 
#### Hilbert's Theorem 90
First we'll need "Hilbert's Theorem 90" on cyclic extensions: if $F \subseteq K$ is a Galois extension with a cyclic Galois group, and $a \in K$, then the norm of $a$ is $1$ if and only if $a = b/g(b)$ for some $b \in K$, where $g$ is a generator of $\Aut_F(K)$. (Recall that the norm of an element $a$ is the product, over all $g \in \Aut_F(K)$, of $g(a)$; alternatively it's the constant term in the minimal polynomial of $a$. The mapping from nonzero elements of $K$ to $F$ is a homomorphism $K^\times \to F^\times$.)

Proof: if $a = b/g(b)$ then $N(a) = N(b)/N(g(b)) = (\prod_{h \in \Aut_F(K)} h(b))/(\prod_{h \in \Aut_F(K)} (h \circ g)b)$, however the denominator is really just the same as the numerator, since for all $h \in \Aut_F(K)$ there exists a unique $g' \in \Aut_F(K)$ with $h \circ g = g'$. 

For the other direction, given $a$ with norm $1$ we need to find a corresponding $b$. Take a generator $g$ of the Galois group and define a map $T: K \to K$ by $T(c) = a \cdot g(c)$; in other words $T$ is $g$ composed with multiplication by $a$, and is therefore a $F$-linear map. Now consider iterating $T$; $T^k(c)$ ends up being $ag(a)g^2(a)\cdots g^{k-1}(a)g^k(a)$. If we can find an eigenvector of $T$ with eigenvalue $1$ then we're done, since if $T(b) = b$ then $ag(b) = b$ and so $a = b/g(b)$. So we'll find the characteristic polynomial of $T$, considered as an $F$-linear transformation and show that it has $1$ as a root. Letting $n$ be the order of $g$, we have $T^n(c) = a\cdot g(a) \cdots g^{n-1}(a) g^n(c) =  a\cdot g(a) \cdots g^{n-1}(a) c = N(a)c$, by the definition of $N$ and the fact that $g^n$ is the identity. Thus $T^n - I = 0$; the minimal polynomial of $T$ thus divides $x^n - 1$. But in fact the minimal polynomial is $x^n - 1$; this follows from the "independence of characters" discussed below. (Note that any element of $\Aut_F(K)$ is a character $K^\times \to K^\times$. Recall that $T^k(c) = \alpha \cdot g(a) \cdots g^{k-1}(a) g^k(c)$, where everything before $g^k$ is just a single element of $K$. If $x^n - 1$ were not the minimal polynomial of $T$ then we would have $\sum_{k=0}^{n-1} c_kg^k = 0$ contradicting the linear independence of characters.) Granting this, since $1$ is a root of the minimal polynomial, $T$ has $1$ as an eigenvalue, and by the argument above it follows that there exists nonzero $b$ with $a = b/g(b)$. 

#### Independence of Characters
Let $G$ be a group and let $K$ be a field. A "character" is a group homomorphism $G \to K^\times$. Then any set of distinct characters is linearly independent in the vector space of all functions $G \to K$. When $G$ is finite this vector space turns out to be isomorphic to $K^n$, with $n = |G|$: letting the elements of $G$ be $g_1, \dots, g_n$ we have an isomorphism that sends a function $f: G \to K$ to $(f(g_1), \dots, f(g_n))$. (characters: connection to Fourier analysis?)

Proof: let $\chi_1, \dots, \chi_k$ be distinct characters $G \to K^\times$, and suppose for a contradiction that they are linearly dependent. Then there exist $c_i \in K$, not all zero, with $c_1\chi_1 + \dots + c_k\chi_i = 0$. We can suppose WLOG that this relation is "minimal" and reorder so that $c_1, c_2$ are both nonzero. (Characters are never the zero function, so it can't be that only one coefficient is nonzero.) Since $\chi_1, \chi_2$ are distinct there exists $h \in G$ with $\chi_1(h) \neq \chi_2(h)$. Note that for any $g \in G$ we have $c_1\chi_1(gh) + \dots + c_n\chi_n(gh) = 0$ or $c_1\chi_1(g)\chi_1(h) + \dots + c_n\chi_n(g)\chi_n(h) = 0$; we also have $c_1\chi_1(g)\chi_1(h) + \dots + c_n\chi_n(g)\chi_n(g)\chi_1(h) = 0$ (note that we now have a factor of $\chi_1(h)$ everywhere). Subtracting the second relation from the first we get $c_2\chi_2(g)(\chi_2(h) - \chi_1(h)) + \dots + c_n\chi_n(g)(\chi_n(h) - \chi_1(h)) = 0$; since this holds for all $g$ it is a linear dependence relation between the functions, i.e. setting $c_i' = c_i(\chi_i(h) - \chi_1(h))$ we have $c_2'\chi_2 + \dots + c_n'\chi_n = 0$. Note that $c_2'$, at least, is nonzero, because $c_2 \neq 0$ and $\chi_2(h) \neq \chi_1(h)$. Thus this is a "smaller" linear dependence relation than the original, contradicting the assumption that the first relation is minimal. 

Now we go back to Kummer's theorem. Say that $\Aut_F(K) = C_d$. Letting $\zeta_d \in F$ we have $N(\zeta_d) = \zeta_d^d = 1$. Hilbert's Theorem 90 then implies that $\zeta_d = b/g(b)$ for some generator $g$ of the Galois group, so $g(b) = \zeta_d^{-1} b$. Now consider the Galois conjugates of $b$, which are $b, \zeta_d^{-1}b, \dots, \zeta_{d}^{-(d-1)}b$; the minimal polynomial of $b$ over $F$ has degree $d$ and so $b$ generates the whole field. Thus $K = F[b]$. Furthermore, $b^d \in F$, since $g(b^d) = (g(b))^d = (\zeta_d^{-1}b)^d = b^d$. Thus $b^d$ is fixed by a generator of the Galois group, so it is fixed by all elements of the Galois group, so it is actually just an element of the base field $F$. That is, $b^d \in F$, or $b$ is the $d$th root of some element in $F$, and the minimal polynomial of $b$ is $x^d - b^d$. 

