# Homotopy of Maps
A homotopy of two functions is a way of continuously deforming one into another. We think of this "deformation" as a process in time: at $t=0$ you have a function $f$, at $t=1$ you have a function $g$, and at any time in between you have some function "in between" $f_t$, which varies continuously with $t$. 

More precisely, we say that $f: X \to Y$ is homotopic to $g: X \to Y$ if there exists a function $f_t: [0, 1] \times X \to Y$ such that, for any $x$, $f_0(x) = f(x), f_1(x) = g(x)$, and $f$ is continuous. We say in this case $f \simeq g$. Also, if $f, g$ are equal on some subset $A$ of $X$, then we can define the notion of "homotopy relative to $A$". $f, g$ are homotopic relative to $A$ if there exists a function $f_t$ as above where, for all $t$ and all $x \in A$, we have $f_t(x) = f(x) = g(x)$.

One of the most important cases of the above is a homotopy of paths. Recall that a path in a topological space is a continuous function $[0, 1] \to X$. Then to say that two paths are homotopic means that one can be, in the intuitive sense, deformed into the other without leaving the manifold. 

Typically we only consider "deformations with the endpoints fixed", i.e. homotopy relative to the set $\{0, 1\}$. Thus if $f(0) = a$ and $f(b) = 1$ we only consider deformations where the "target", and all intermediate paths, start at $a$ and end at $b$. A further specialization of this is homotopic loops at a given "basepoint". Here we only look at closed curves, say with $f(0) = f(1) = a$, and again consider homotopy relative to $\{0, 1\}$. When all our curves start and end at the same point it becomes reasonable to compose any two of them; this is (up to homotopy) a well-defined, associative, and invertible operation with identity, thus leading to the [[Fundamental Group]]. 
# Homotopy Equivalence
Homotopy equivalence can be considered a sort of looser equivalent of homeomorphism. We say that $X, Y$ are homotopy equivalent if there exist continuous (not necessarily bijective) maps $f:X \to Y, g: Y \to X$ with $f \circ g \simeq i_X$ and $g \circ f \simeq i_Y$ (here $i_X$, $i_Y$ are the identity maps on $X, Y$). We denote this situation by $X \simeq Y$. 

This is an equivalence relation on topological spaces. For any $X$ we have $X \simeq X$, since we can just take $f, g$ to both be the identity on $X$. If $X \simeq Y$ then there exist $f, g$ satisfying the given properties, and we can show that $Y \simeq X$ by interchanging the roles of $f$ and $g$. Finally, if $X \simeq Y$ and $Y \simeq Z$ then $X \simeq Z$, because...

If $X$ and $Y$ are homeomorphic then they are homotopy equivalent. We have a continuous map $f$ with a continuous inverse $f^{-1}$, so $f \circ f^{-1} = i_X$ and $f^{-1} \circ f = i_Y$, and clearly $i_X$ is homotopic to itself.

On the other hand there are homotopy equivalent spaces which are not homeomorphic: for instance, $\R$ and the single point $\{0\}$. Typically we would show these are homotopy equivalent with a deformation retraction, but here we will do it explicitly. Let $f: \R \to \{0\}$ be the zero function $f(x) = 0$ and let $g: \{0\} \to \R$ be the inclusion $g(0) = 0$. Then $g \circ f = f$. $f$ is homotopic to the identity map by $f_t(x) = (1 - t)x$: then we have $f_0(x) = x$ and $f_1(x) = 0$. On the other hand $f \circ g = g$ which is already the identity on $\{0\}$.

## Deformation Retractions
Let $A$ be a subspace of a topological space $X$. A *retraction* to $A$ is a continuous map $r: X \to A$ which is the identity on $A$, i.e. $r(a) = a$ for any $a \in A$. A standard example is the retraction of the punctured plane $\R^2 - \{0\}$ to the circle $S^1$ given by $(x, y) \to (\frac{x}{||(x, y)||}, \frac{y}{||(x, y)||})$, or in other words just $v \to v/||v||$.

A *deformation retraction* is a map $h: X \times [0, 1] \to X$ with $h_0(x) = x$ for all $x$, $h_1(x) \in A$ for all $x \in X$, and $h_t(a) = a$ for all $a \in A$ and all $t \in [0, 1]$. Thus we continuously move every point in $X$ into $A$ without moving $A$ at all. It is a homotopy between $i_X$ and a retraction $r: X \to A$, but we add the further condition that it is constant on $A$ for all time, not just at the end $t=1$. 

Thus if there is a deformation retraction from $X$ to $A$ then they are homotopy equivalent, with $i_X$ and $r$ being the maps whose composition is homotopic to the identity. Explicitly: let $h_t(x)$ be the deformation retraction; then let $f$ be the inclusion $A \to X$ and $g$ be the retraction $h_1$. Then $g \circ f: A \to A$ simply is the identity, because $f$ is the identity on $A$ and $g$, as a retraction to $A$, is the same. As for $f \circ g: X \to X$, it is equal to $g = h_1$, and $h_t(x)$ gives a homotopy equivalence between $h_1$ and $h_0$, which is the identity on $X$. 

The homotopy equivalence of $\R$ and $\{0\}$ which we gave above is a deformation retraction. More generally, for any $x \in \R^n$ (thinking of $x$ as a vector, so scalar multiplication is available), we can use the "straight-line homotopy" $f_t(x) = (1-t)x$ to give a deformation retraction onto the origin. This shrinks each point in $\R^n$ to the origin along the line between the origin and $x$. Clearly it is continuous in $x$ and $t$, and it keeps the origin fixed for all $t$. So is the retraction above from the punctured plane to $S^1$. It is given by $f_t(v) = (1-t)v + tv/||v||$. Then $f_0$ is the identity, $f_0(v) = v$; $f_1$ is the retraction we gave earlier; and for any $v$ on the unit circle we have $f_t(v) = (1 - t)v + (t/||v||)v = (1 - t)v + tv = v - tv + tv = v$. 

Not all retractions can be realized as deformation retractions. For example, for any point $x_0 \in X$, the constant map $f(x) = x_0$ is a retraction onto $\{x_0\}$, but not all spaces are contractible, so we should expect that this retraction cannot in general be part of a deformation retraction. Furthermore, not all homotopy equivalences are deformation retractions. A circle is homeomorphic to a square (and thus is homotopy equivalent), but neither can be embedded in the other, so there's no way to find a deformation retraction between them.  

Another way to show that the circle and square are homotopy equivalent is to show that the punctured plane deformation retracts onto each one. This generalizes: if $X, Y$ are any homotopy equivalent spaces, then there exists a space $Z$ with $X \subseteq Z, Y \subseteq Z$, and there exist deformation retractions from $Z$ onto $X$ and $Z$ onto $Y$. Thus in some sense using deformation retractions, along with the fact that homotopy equivalence is an equivalence relation, suffices to prove homotopy equivalence whenever it exists. 
## Contractible Spaces
A space is contractible if it is homotopy equivalent to a single point. One equivalent condition for this is that $i_X$ is homotopic to a constant function. $\R^n$ is contractible, as we saw before. So is an open/closed disc or open/closed box. Indeed, any convex set in $\R^n$ is contractible: we can pick an arbitrary point $x$ in the set, and for any other point $y$, contract it towards $x$ along the line from $y$ to $x$ (which, by convexity, must lie in the set). This then gives a deformation retraction onto $\{x\}$. 

Proving contractibility can be typically be done easily, by exhibiting an explicit deformation retraction or a homeomorphism to a set known to be contractible. Sometimes we may need to "chain" these two steps together: for example, find another set $B$ which deformation retracts onto the given set $A$, and finding a homeomorphism between $B$ and a contractible set. See for example the "house with two rooms" in Hatcher. 

Proving noncontractibility, on the other hand, is typically hard. The most common strategy is to calculate some algebraic invariants of the space (which are invariant under homotopy equivalence) and show that they are not equal to the corresponding invariants of a point. For example, a point has trivial [[De Rham Cohomology]] ($H^0 = \R$, $H^i = 0$ otherwise), while the circle has $H^1 = \R$; a point has a trivial [[Fundamental Group]], while the circle has $\pi_1 = \Z$. 