# Infinitude of primes and related theorems
Infinitude of Primes
--------------------
Euclid's proof: let p be a prime, and let x be the product of all the primes up to and including p, i.e. 2 * 3 * … * p. Now consider x + 1. It has a remainder of 1 when divided by any of the primes less than or equal to p, so it cannot be a multiple of any of those primes. But it must be divisible by *some* prime number, so either x + 1 is prime itself, or it is composite and only divisible by some prime(s) larger than p. Either way, there must exist some prime larger than p. So given any prime, one can always find a prime larger than it, so there must be infinitely many primes.

Infinitude of 4k+3 Primes
-------------------------
The overall structure of this proof can be used to prove a few interesting related theorems. One of these is that there are infinitely many primes of the form 4k + 3, i.e. primes that are congruent to 3 mod 4. The proof for this relies mainly on two facts. The first is that, if n ≡ 3 (mod 4), then n^2 ≡ 1 (mod 4). Proof: if n ≡ 3 (mod 4), then n - 3 = 4k for some integer k, or n = 4k + 3. Therefore n^2 = (4k+3)^2 = 16k^2 + 24k + 9 = 16k^2 + 24k + 8 + 1 = 4(4k^2 + 6k + 2) + 1. So n^2 has a remainder of 1 when divided by 3, so n^2 ≡ 1 (mod 4). The second is one of the basic properties of congruence(link), that if a ≡ c (mod n) and b ≡ d (mod n) then ac ≡ bd (mod n). 

With these in mind, we can begin the proof. Let p be some prime with p > 3, and without loss of generality suppose that p is congruent to 1 mod p. Let q be the largest prime less than p which is congruent to 3 mod p. Let x = (5 * 13 * … * p) * (3^2 * 7^2 * … * q^2). Each term of the product is congruent to 1 mod 4, so (5 * 13 * … * p) * (3^2 * 7^2 * … q^2) ≡ 1 * 1 * … * 1 ≡ 1 (mod 4). So x is a composite number of the form 4k + 1. Now consider x + 2. This is of the form 4k + 3, and it is not divisible by any of the primes less than or equal to p. Furthermore, it is not even (and so cannot have a prime factor of the form 4k or 4k + 2), and its prime factors cannot only be of the form 4k + 1 (since multiplying together only numbers congruent to 1 mod 4 will result in another number congruent to 1 mod 4). So it must have a prime factor which is of the form 4k + 3 and which is larger than q. So given any prime, one can always find a 4k + 3 prime larger than it, so there are infinitely many primes of the form 4k + 3. 

Arbitrarily Long Sequences of Consecutive Composite Numbers
-----------------------------------------------------------
One final proof similar to the proof of the infinitude of primes is the proof that there are arbitrarily long strings of consecutive composite numbers. As before, let p be a prime and let x = 2 * 3 * … * p. Since x is divisible by 2, x + 2, is divisible by 2: x = 2a, and x + 2 = 2a + 2 = 2(a + 1). Similarly, x + 3 is divisible by 3, x + 4 is again divisible by 2 and, in general, for any x + k where 2 <= k <= p, x and k will have a prime factor in common, so their sum will be divisible by that prime and will thus be composite. Furthermore, for all p >= 3, x + p + 1 will be even, so there will be a sequence of p consecutive composite numbers. Since for any n one can find a p such that p >= n, for any n one can find a sequence of consecutive composite numbers of length n, so there are arbitrarily long sequences of consecutive composite numbers.

