# Definition of a Lie Group
A Lie group is a [[Groups|group]] which is also a [[Manifolds|manifold]], where the basic operations of the group are smooth. That is, given a group $G$ with some manifold structure, we require that the maps $(G \times G) \to G$ and $G \to G$ given by $a, b \to ab$ and $a \to a^{-1}$ are smooth. 

# Examples
## Vector Spaces

## General Linear Group
Recall that $GL(n, \R)$ is the set of all invertible $n \times n$ real [[Matrices|matrices]], or in other words matrices with nonzero determinant. It is an immersed submanifold of $\R^{n \times n}$ which is also a Lie group.

That $GL(n, \R)$ is a submanifold of $\R^{n \times n}$ follows from the fact that it is an open subset of $\R^{n \times n}$, and open subsets of $\R^N$ are $N$-dimensional manifolds. To see this, note that the set of singular matrices, i.e. matrices with $\det(A) = 0$, is closed (as the preimage of the closed set $\{0\}$), so its complement $GL(n, \R)$ is open. 

Smoothness of matrix multiplication follows from the fact that the entries of $AB$ are polynomials in the entries of $A$ and the entries of $B$. Smoothness of inversion is trickier; Cramer's rule implies that the entries of the inverse are given by determinants of various submatrices of $A$, all divided by $\det(A)$. Thus they are rational functions of the entries of $A$, with discontinuities only at the points where $\det(A) = 0$. 
## Special Linear Group
$SL(n, \R)$ is the subgroup of $GL(n, \R)$ consisting of matrices with determinant $1$. Since it is a level set of the determinant, we might expect that it is a regular submanifold, which indeed it is. 

To prove this, we need to compute the differential of $\det: \R^{n \times n} \to \R$ at points where $\det(A) = 1$. We use the following trick: letting $A$ be such a matrix, consider the function $\R \to \R$ given by $t \to \det(tA)$. On one hand, we have by the chain rule that $\frac{d}{dt}(\det(tA)) = D(\det)_{tA} \circ (\frac{d}{dt}A)_{t}$; on the other hand, since $\det(tA) = t^n \det(A)$, we have $\frac{d}{dt}(\det(tA)) = nt^{n-1}\det(A)$. Thus $D(\det)_{tA} \circ (\frac{d}{dt}tA)_{t}= D(\det)_{tA} \circ A = nt^{n-1}\det(A)$; setting $t=1$ gets us $D(\det)_A \circ A = n\det(A)$. Thus $D(\det)_A$, considered as a row vector, must be nonzero, since the right-hand side is nonzero; but a nonzero row vector is surjective. Thus the differential of $\det$ is surjective everywhere in $SL(n, \R)$, so $SL(n, \R)$ is an embedded submanifold of $GL(n, \R)$ with dimension $n^2 - 1$, by the regular level set theorem. 
## Orthogonal Group
We know that the [[Orthogonal Operators and Isometries|orthogonal matrices]]--the linear maps that preserve lengths and angles, or equivalently the real matrices that satisfy $A^tA = I$--form a group, a subgroup of $GL_n(\R)$. Now we prove that they form a submanifold of $GL_n$ as well, using the regular value theorem.

Define a map from the set of all $n \times n$ real matrices to the set of symmetric $n \times n$ real matrices by $f(A) = A^tA$. This is a map into the symmetric matrices, since $A^tA$ is symmetric: $(A^tA)^t = A^t A^{tt} = A^tA$. It is also smooth, since the entries of $f(A)$ are polynomials of the elements of $A$. Then $O(n)$ is a level set of $f$, namely $O(n) = f^{-1}(I)$.

Now we check that $I$ is a regular value. We start by looking at the differential $Df_A(B)$ where $A$ is an orthogonal matrix and $B$ is any matrix. Equivalently, this is $\frac{d}{dt}f(A + tB)$ evaluated at $t = 0$. This equals $\frac{d}{dt}((A + tB)^T(A + tB))$, or $\frac{d}{dt}(A^TA + t(A^TB + B^TA) + t^2B^TB)$, which in turn equals $A^TB + B^TA + 2tB^TB$, and evaluating at $t=0$ gets $A^TB + B^TA$.  

Now consider $(Df)_A(C)$ where $C = \frac{1}{2}AS$ for some symmetric $S$. Then $(Df_A)(c) = \frac{1}{2}(A^TAS + (AS)^TA) = \frac{1}{2}(S + S^TA^TA) = \frac{1}{2}(S + S^T) = \frac{1}{2}(S + S) = S$. Thus for any symmetric matrix $S$, there exists a matrix $C$ with $(Df_A)(C) = S$, so the differential is surjective for any orthogonal $A$, and so $I$ is a regular value of $f$. By the regular value theorem, $O(n)$ is a closed, embedded submanifold of $\R^{n^2}$. It has dimension $n^2$ minus the dimension of the set of all symmetric matrices, $\frac{n(n+1)}{2}$, i.e. $n^2 - \frac{n(n+1)}{2} = \frac{n(n-1)}{2}$. 

The smoothness of the group operations is inherited from $SL_n(\R)$. Thus $O(n)$ is a Lie group.
### Topology of O(n) and SO(n)
#### O(n) is Disconnected 
Every orthogonal matrix has determinant $\pm 1$; the matrices with determinant $1$ are another Lie group, $SO(n)$. Since the preimages $\det^{-1}(\{1\})$ and $\det^{-1}(\{-1\})$ are disjoint closed sets whose union is $O(n)$, $O(n)$ is disconnected. Those sets are the two connected components of $O(n)$; they are diffeomorphic, with left multiplication by any matrix $A \in O(n)$ with $\det(A) = -1$ being a diffeomorphism $SO(n) \to O(n) \backslash SO(n)$. Note that, since $O(n)$ is the disjoint union of two "copies" of $SO(n)$, $SO(n)$ must have the same dimension as $O(n)$, namely $\frac{n(n-1)}{2}$. (We prove the connectedness of $SO(n)$ below, and the connectedness of the other component follows immediately from the fact that it is diffeomorphic to $SO(n)$.)
#### SO(n) is Connected
We can show by induction that $SO(n)$ is path-connected, and thus is connected. $SO(2)$ is just a circle, so it's obviously connected. Now suppose that $SO(n-1)$ is path-connected. If we can find a path from the identity matrix to any $A \in SO(n)$, then we're done, since concatenating paths then gets us paths between any two elements of $SO(n)$. 

Finding a path from $I$ to $A$ amounts to finding a way to continuously, rigidly move the basis vectors $e_1, \dots, e_n$ to $Ae_1, \dots, Ae_n$. First, we can find the plane $\operatorname{span}(e_1, Ae_1)$ in which $e_1$ and $Ae_1$ lie, and use a rotation $B$ in that plane (an element of $SO(2)$) to move $e_1$ to $Ae_1$. Of course we have to consider $B$ as an element of $SO(n)$, so as we rotate $e_1$ into $Ae_1$, it carries the other basis vectors along with it, say to $Be_2, \dots, Be_n$. Now we look for a continuous motion that can take $Be_2, \dots, Be_n$ to $Ae_2, \dots, Ae_n$ without moving $Ae_1$. Note first that the other $Be_i$ are all orthogonal to $Ae_1$, since $Ae_1 = Be_1$, $B$ preserves angles, and the other $e_i$ are all orthogonal to $e_1$. By much the same reasoning, the other $Ae_i$ are all orthogonal to $Ae_1$. Thus both $Be_2, \dots, Be_n$ and $Ae_2, \dots, Ae_n$ lie in the orthogonal complement of $\operatorname{span}(e_1, Ae_1)$, which is just a copy of $\R^{n-1}$. By assumption, $SO(n-1)$ is path-connected, so we can find a continuous rigid motion $C$ taking the $Be_i$ to the other $Ae_i$, as desired. Thus applying $B$ then $C$ gives us a single continuous rigid motion which takes $e_1, \dots, e_n$ to $Ae_1, \dots, Ae_n$. 
# Lie Algebras
## Abstract Lie Algebras
A Lie algebra over a field $K$ is a vector space over $K$ with a bracket operation satisfying the properties of the [[Vector Fields on Manifolds#The Bracket Operation|bracket operation on vector fields]] (bilinearity, skew-symmetry, the Jacobi identity). The linked note proves that the set $X(M)$ of all vector fields on a given manifold is a Lie algebra, with the bracket described above as the bracket operation. The cross product turns $\R^3$ into a Lie algebra, with $[X, Y] = X \times Y$. As a more trivial example, any vector space can be turned into a Lie algebra by letting $[X, Y] = 0$ for any vectors $X, Y$. (These are called "abelian Lie algebras".) 

For a less familiar example, let $\operatorname{gl}(n, \R)$ be the set of all $n \times n$ real matrices (not just invertible ones) with bracket given by the commutator, $[A, B] = AB - BA$. The proof that the commutator satisfies the axioms of a bracket operation is formally identical to the proof that the bracket operation on vector fields satisfies those properties. We can also consider subspaces of $\operatorname{gl}(n, \R)$. For example, we can define $\operatorname{sl}(n, \R)$ as the set of $n \times n$ real matrices with trace $0$. This is a vector subspace of $\text{gl}(n, \R)$, because of the general identities $\tr(A + B) = \tr(A) + \tr(B)$ (hence if $\tr(A) = 0, \tr(B) = 0$ then $\tr(A + B) = 0$) and $\tr(cA) = c\tr(A)$. As for closure under the bracket operation, since $\tr(AB) = \tr(BA)$ for any $A, B$, we have $\tr([A, B]) = \tr(AB - BA) = \tr(AB) - \tr(BA) = 0$. We also get a subspace $\text{so}(n, \R)$, defined as the set of all $n \times n$ matrices with $A^t = -A$. (These are called skew-symmetric matrices.) That it is a vector subspace follows trivially from linearity of the transpose. For the bracket, we have $[A, B]^t = (AB - BA)^t = (AB^t) - (BA)^t = B^t A^t - A^t B^t$; if $A, B \in \text{so}(n, \R)$ then $B^t A^t = (-B)(-A) = BA$, and similarly for the other term, so we get $BA - AB = -(AB - BA) = -[A, B]$. Thus $[A, B]$ is skew-symmetric for any skew-symmetric $A, B$. 
## The Lie Algebra of a Lie Group
Associated with any $g \in G$ we have two diffeomorphisms, "left translation" $L_g$ and "right translation" $R_g$. These are given by $L_g(h) = gh$ and $R_g(h) = hg$. A vector field $X$ on $G$ is called "left-invariant" if $(L_g)_*X = X$ for all $X$. (Be careful here, because the two vector fields are being evaluated at different points here--we need $(L_g)_*X_h = X_{gh}$.) The set of all left-invariant vector fields on $G$ is called the Lie algebra of $G$, denoted $\mathfrak{g}$. This is a vector space, in the sense that linear combinations of left-invariant vector fields are also left-invariant vector fields. It is nonempty, because the zero vector field is left-invariant. Finally, it is a Lie algebra, in the sense of being closed under the bracket operation (the bracket of left-invariant vector fields is left-invariant). Let $X, Y$ be left-invariant. Then for any $g$, $(L_g)_*[X, Y] = [(L_g)_*X, (L_g)_*Y] = [X, Y]$, where we can use the naturality of brackets because $L_g$ is a diffeomorphism, and the second equality comes from the left-invariance of $X$ and $Y$.  
## Lie Algebra = Tangent Space at the Identity
Remember that these vector fields give derivations at each point: a point can thus act on vector fields, by $p(X) = X_p$ . As it happens, the "evaluation at the identity" map $\epsilon$ is a vector space isomorphism $\mathfrak{g} \to T_IG$, where $I$ is the identity element in the group. Thus $\dim(\mathfrak{g}) = \dim(G)$. Proof: additivity of $\epsilon$ follows from $\epsilon(X + Y) = (X + Y)_I = X_I + Y_I = \epsilon(X) + \epsilon(Y)$, and the same for scalar multiplication. Thus $\epsilon$ is linear. To show injectivity, we need $\ker(\epsilon) = \{0\}$, where $0$ here is the vector field which is $0$ everywhere. If $\epsilon(X) = 0$, then $X_I = 0$; but by left-invariance of $X$, we have $(L_g)_*(X_I) = X_{gI} = X_g = 0$ for all $g \in G$. Thus $X$ is zero everywhere, so the zero vector field is the only element of the kernel. For surjectivity, given a tangent vector $X_I \in T_IG$, define a vector field $X$ on $G$ by $X_g = (L_g)_*X_I$. Then this is left-invariant, because for any $h$, $(L_h)_*(X_g) = (L_h)_*(L_g)_*X_I = (L_{hg})_*X_I = X_{hg}$, with the last equality following from the definition of $X$. We also need to check smoothness of $X$; this follows from the smoothness of multiplication, which implies the smoothness of left multiplication $L_g$ and its differential $(L_g)_*$. 

## Digression: Linear Vector Fields
A linear vector field on $\R^n$ is one where, for all $x \in \R^n$, there exists a matrix $A$ with $X(x) = Ax$. These correspond to systems of linear differential equations, and we can find their integral curves by solving those systems. This is because the flow $\phi$ of such a vector field satisfies $\frac{d}{dt}(\phi_t(x)) = X(\phi(x)) = A(\phi(x))$. Formally, we have $\phi_t(x) = e^{tA}x_0$, thinking of the equation $\frac{d}{dt}(\phi_t(x)) = A(\phi(x))$ as analogous to $y' = ay$. To work with this more rigorously, we can define the [[Matrix Exponential|matrix exponential]] as a power series $e^{tA} = \sum_{k \geq 0} \frac{t^k}{k!}A^k$, and prove that $e^{tA}$ solves the differential equation $x' = Ax$. 
## The Exponential Map
### Lie Algebras and Flows
Since the elements $X \in \mathfrak{g}$ of the Lie algebra are vector fields, we know by the general theorem on local flows that they generate local flows. In fact, each element of the Lie algebra generates a global flow $F_t^X: \R \times G \to G$. Proof: Let $F$ be the local flow associated with $X$, so that $F$ maps $(-\epsilon, \epsilon) \times U \to G$ for some $\epsilon, U$ with $I \in U$, and $\frac{d}{dt}F_t(h)|_{t=0} = X_h$. Now we show that, for any $g \in G$, the flow can be defined around $g$, even if $g \notin U$. Let $gU$ be the set of all elements of $G$ of the form $gh$ for $h \in U$. Now, for each $gh \in gU$,  $gF_t(h)$ gives a path in $gU$ for $|t| < \epsilon$. In other words, we can take the translation $L_g \circ F_t$ to get a path in $gU$. We then have $\frac{d}{dt}(gF_t(h)) = \frac{d}{dt}(L_g \circ F_t)|_{t=0} = (L_g)_* \circ \frac{d}{dt}F_t(h)|_{t=0}$. But that second time derivative is $X_h$, so we get $(L_g)_* X_h = X_{gh}$. Thus $gF_t^X(h)$ is the integral curve of $X$ through $gh$. Repeating this trick for arbitrary $g$, we get an open cover of $G$ by sets $gU$, with a flow defined on each sets. By uniqueness of flows, these flows agree on the overlaps, so they give us a flow $F_t^X$, defined for time $(-\epsilon, \epsilon)$, but defined on the whole group. Now we want to extend it to arbitrary time, which we can do with the semigroup property: composing $F_s \circ F_t$ gives us a well-defined $F_{s+t}$ for any $s, t$, since we'll never end up at a point in $G$ where the flow is undefined. Thus we have a global flow defined on all of $\R \times G$. 

Note the use of the principle that the Lie algebra "looks the same everywhere"--we can translate it from the identity to anywhere in the group and get the same properties. 
### Definition of The Exponential Map
As a special case of this, for each $X \in \mathfrak{g}$, the integral curve of $X$, $F_t^X(I)$, is defined for all $t$. This is called the "exponential map" of $X$, by analogy with the [[Matrix Exponential|matrix exponential]]; it maps the Lie algebra into the Lie group, by $\exp(X) = F_1^X(I)$.  
### Basic Properties
For example, $\exp(0) = I$, since $F_t^0(I) = I$ for all $t$. Lines in the Lie algebra, $tX$ for $X \in \mathfrak{g}$, get mapped to integral curves through the identity, $\exp(tX) = F_t^X(I)$. We can use this to write the integral curve of $X$ at any starting point, $F_t^X(g)$, explicitly: $F_t^X(g) = g \cdot \exp(tX)$. Thus applying $F_t^X$ to a group element $g$ is the same as translating $g$ on the right by $\exp(tX)$. The proof is similar to the calculation done in "Lie Algebras and Flows" above: we have $\frac{d}{dt}(g \cdot \exp(tX))|_{t=0} = (L_g)_* \frac{d}{dt}\exp(tX)|_{t=0} = (L_g)_* X_I = X_g$  and $F_{t}^X(g)$ satisfies the same differential equation and initial condition, so they are equal by the uniqueness of flows. 

The exponential map, as a function $\mathfrak{g} \to G$, is a local diffeomorphism. We also have $\exp((s + t)X) = \exp(sX)\exp(tX)$ for any fixed $X$. Thus $\exp$, for fixed $X$, gives a homomorphism from the additive group of real numbers to $G$. 

Proof: for the first, fix $X$ and consider the line $\sigma(t) = tX$. Then $\frac{d}{dt}\sigma(t)|_{t=0} = X$. The differential of the exponential map (at $0$ in the Lie algebra), applied to $X$, $(d\exp)_0(X)$, is therefore equal to $(d\exp)_0(\frac{d}{dt}\sigma(t))_{t=0}$, which by the chain rule equals $\frac{d}{dt}\exp(\sigma(t))_{t=0}$, or $\frac{d}{dt}\exp(tX)_{t=0}$. But since $\exp(tX)$ is the integral curve of $X$, $\frac{d}{dt}(\exp(tX)) = X_I$. Thus $(d\exp)_0(X_I) = X_I$, so $(d\exp)_0$ is the identity map $T_0\mathfrak{g} \to T_IG$. That $\exp$ is a local diffeomorphism then follows from the inverse function theorem.

For the second, let $g = \exp(sX)$ in the equation $F_s^X(g) = g \cdot \exp(sX)$. Then we get $\exp(tX)\exp(sX) = F_s^X(\exp(tX)) = F_s^X(F_t^X(I)) = F_{s+t}^X(I) = \exp((s+t)X)$. 

# Lie Subgroups
## One-Parameter Subgroups
A 1-parameter subgroup of $G$ is a homomorphism $\gamma$ from the additive group of the real numbers to $G$, so that $\gamma(s+t) = \gamma(s)\gamma(t)$ for all $s, t$. We just saw that, for each $X \in \mathfrak{g}$, $\exp(tX)$ is a one-parameter subgroup. Note also that, for any such subgroup, $\gamma(0) = I$. 

In a Lie group, all one-parameter subgroups are given by the exponential map, i.e. all are equal to $\exp(tX)$ for some $X \in \mathfrak{g}$. Proof: let $\gamma(t)$ be a one-parameter subgroup. Let $X_I = \frac{d}{dt}\gamma(t)_{t=0}$, so $X_I \in T_IG = \mathfrak{g}$. We can call $X$ the "generator" of $\gamma(t)$. Now let $X$ be the left-invariant extension of $X_I$ to all $g \in G$, recalling that every element of $T_IG$ corresponds to a left-invariant vector field on $G$. Then $\frac{d}{dt}(\gamma(t)) = \frac{d}{ds}\gamma(t+s)|_{s=0} = \frac{d}{ds}\gamma(t)\gamma(s)|_{s=0}= \frac{d}{ds}(L_{\gamma(t)}\gamma(s))|_{s=0}$. That in turn is equal to $(L_{\gamma(t)})_* X_I = X_{\gamma(t)}$. By uniqueness of flows, $\gamma(t) = \exp(tX)$ for all $t$. 

## Lie Subgroups In General
Define a Lie subgroup of a Lie group $G$ to be a subgroup $H$ of $G$ which is also an immersed submanifold, so that the group operations on $H$ are smooth. For example, $SO(n)$ is a Lie subgroup of $GL(n, \R)$. We can also consider the torus as a Lie group $S^1 \times S^1 = (e^{i\theta}, e^{i\phi})$; then, for any $\alpha$, $\gamma(t) = (e^{2\pi i t}, e^{2\pi i \alpha t})$ is a one-parameter subgroup, which is also a Lie subgroup. There are two types of subgroups coming from this example: if $\alpha$ is rational, $\alpha = p/q$, then $\gamma(q) = (e^{2\pi i q}, e^{2\pi i p t}) = (1, 1)$ which is the identity element. The image of $\gamma$ is then a closed curve on $T$ which starts and ends at the identity--more precisely, a closed, embedded submanifold. If $\alpha$ is irrational, then it will never come back to the identity, but for any ball around the identity, no matter how small, it will enter that ball infinitely many times. Thus the image of $\gamma$ is dense in the torus, and is neither embedded nor closed. 

If we restrict ourselves to "embedded Lie subgroups" (which are just subgroups of $G$ that are also embedded submanifolds) then the group operation is automatically smooth. This is because, if $H$ is an embedded subgroup, the inclusion map looks like $i(x^1, \dots, x^k) = (x^1, \dots, x^k, 0, \dots, 0)$ in the right coordinates (the "$H$-adapted chart"). Then, if we see what multiplication looks like in this chart.....

## Closed Subgroup Theorem
An easy way to find embedded subgroups is the following result: any closed subgroup is an embedded subgroup. This shows, for instance, that $SL(n, \R), O(n), SO(n)$ are all embedded subgroups of $GL(n, \R)$. 

## Lie Group Homomorphisms
A Lie group homomorphism is a group homomorphism $H \to G$ which is smooth. If $F$ is a Lie group homomorphism, it must send the identity to the identity, hence its differential at the identity is a linear map $T_IH \to T_IG$. We might hope that it is a Lie algebra homomorphism; the only other condition we need is that it respects brackets.

Recall that any $X \in T_IH$ can be extended into a left-invariant vector field $\tilde{X}$ on all of $H$. Let $F$ be a Lie group homomorphism with $F(X) = Y$, and extend $Y$ to a vector field $\tilde{Y}$ in the same way. Then $\tilde{X}$ and $\tilde{Y}$ are $F$-related. 

Proof: we need to show $F_*(\tilde{X}_h) = \tilde{Y}_{F(h)}$. The left-hand side is $(F_*)_h (L_h)_* X = (F \circ L_h)_*X$, while the right-hand side is $(L_{F(h)})_* Y = (L_{F(h)})_*F_*(X)=(L_{F(h)}\circ F)_*X$. Note that $(F \circ L_h)(x) = F(hx) = F(h)F(x)$, since $F$ is a homomorphism. That then equals $(L_{F(h)} \circ F)(x)$. Thus  $(F \circ L_h)_*X = (L_{F(h)} \circ F)X$ and so $\tilde{X} = \tilde{Y}$. 

As a corollary, the induced map does respect brackets. This follow from the naturality of brackets and the lemma above: $F_*[X, Z] = [F_*X, F_*Z]$. Thus every homomorphism of Lie groups induces a homomorphism of Lie algebras. 

As a further corollary, Lie group homomorphisms respect exponential maps: $F(\exp(tX)) = \exp(tF_*(X))$, with the left-hand side being an exponential in $H$ and the right-hand side being an exponential in $G$. This follows from the naturality of flows. 

Returning to matrix Lie groups, this tells us that, if $F$ is a homomorphism of matrix groups, $F(e^{tX}) = e^{tF(x)}$. It also tells us (taking the homomorphism to be an inclusion map from a subgroup $H$ of $GL(n, \R)$ to $GL(n, \R)$) that the exponential map (in the abstract sense) on $H$ is just the same matrix exponential used in $GL(n, \R)$. Thus exponential maps in $SL(n, \R), O(n)$, etc. can be computed using the same power series. 


