# Linear congruences
This article covers the basic theory of linear congruences: conditions for the existence of solutions, finding all solutions from one, number of solutions in the canonical complete residue system (link), and systems of linear congruences and the Chinese Remainder Theorem.

Existence of Solutions; Finding All Solutions From One
------------------------------------------------------
A "linear congruence" refers to an equation of the form ax ≡ b (mod n), where x is an unknown and a, b, and n are integer constants with n > 0. By the definition of congruence, this means ax - b = yn, where y is an integer, or ax - yn = b. This is, of course, a [linear Diophantine equation](Linear%20diophantine%20equations.md) with two unknowns (although the only one we really care about is x), and so many of the theorems about linear Diophantine equations apply here. For example, we know that there exist solutions when gcd(a, n)|b. We also know that, if x~0~ is one solution, all other solutions are given by x~0~ + k * (n / gcd(a,n)) for integer values of k.

Number of Solutions in the Complete Canonical Residue System
------------------------------------------------------------
One can see that, as with linear Diophantine equations, a linear congruence with one solution will have infinitely many. However, how many of those solutions fall into the complete canonical residue system mod n? Certainly the initial solution x~0 ~must--if not, then it must be the case that x~0~  x~1~ (mod n), where x~1 ~is a number in the complete canonical residue syste mod n, so ax~1~ ≡ ax~0~ ≡ b (mod n), so x~1~ is also a solution. Thus if there are any solutions at all, at least one will be in the canonical complete residue system--from here on out, we will call the smallest solution in the canonical complete residue system x~0~. But how many of the other solutions, given by x~0~ + k * (n/gcd(a,n))? As it turns out, the solutions given by the values k = 0, 1, 2, ... (gcd(a, n) - 1) are all within the canonical complete residue system, and no others are. The solution given by k = gcd(a,n) is x~0~ + n, which is clearly outside of the canonical complete residue system, so that sets an upper bound on the value of k. Now consider the solution given by k = (gcd(a,n) - 1), which is x~0 ~+ (gcd(a, n) - 1) * (n / gcd(a,n)) = x~0~ + (n - (n / gcd(a, n))). Suppose that this solution was not in the complete canonical residue system, i.e. was greater than or equal to n. That could only happen if x~0 ~were greater than or equal to (n / gcd(a, n)). But if that were the case, the solution given by k = 0 would not be the smallest solution; indeed, we could find a smaller solution with k = -1. But we have supposed that x~0 ~is the smallest solution in the canonical complete residue system, which implies that it cannot be greater than or equal to n / gcd(a, n). So k = gcd(a,n) - 1 gives a solution, as do all smaller natural number values of k, while solutions given by k = gcd(a,n) and above are all outside of the canonical complete residue system. Thus the solutions in the canonical complete residue system are given by x~0~ + k * (n/gcd(a,n)) for k = 0, 1, 2, ... (gcd(a,n) - 1), and as a corollary, the number of solutions in the canonical complete residue system is gcd(a,n).

Systems of Linear Congruences and the Chinese Remainder Theorem
---------------------------------------------------------------
What about *systems* of linear congruences, where 1 variable is supposed to solve many congruences? We will restrict ourselves here to congruences without leading coefficients, i.e. systems where all congruences are of the form x ≡ a (mod n). The key result for such systems is the "Chinese Remainder Theorem", which states that in a system of linear congruences, x ≡ a~0~ (mod n~0~), x ≡ a~1~ (mod n~1~), ... x ≡ a~k~ (mod n~k~), where all the moduli are pairwise relatively prime, there is a unique solution modulo n~0~ * n~1~ * ... * n~k~. The proof proceeds inductively, starting with the case where there are two congruences. When we say we wish to find the number x such that x ≡ a~0~ (mod n~0~) and x ≡ a~1~ (mod n~1~), with gcd(n~0~, n~1~) = 1, we mean the number x such that x - a~0~ = bn~0 ~and x - a~1~ = cn~1~, where b and c are integers.

