The exponential of a square matrix is defined by $e^A = \sum_{k =0}^\infty \frac{1}{k!}A^k$. Assuming that this converges, it will just be another matrix with the same dimensions. If we introduce a parameter $t$ we can get functions from real numbers to matrices, $e^{tA} = \sum_{k=0}^\infty \frac{t^k}{k!}A^k$. This can be motivated by systems of linear differential equations: if we have a system of linear differential equations given by a matrix-vector equation, $x' = Ax$, then by a formal analogy with the fact that the solution of $y' = ay$ is $y = Ce^{ax}$, we might expect that the solution of the system should be $x = e^{tA}x_0$--whatever $e^{tA}$ might mean. First we justify the use of power series of matrices by proving that $e^{tA}$ converges for all $t$. 
# Existence of the Matrix Exponential
## Operator Norms
The most general setting in which this makes sense is linear maps $A: V \to V$ where $V$ is a normed vector space. We say that $A$ is bounded if there exists a constant $c$ with $|Av| \leq c|v|$ for all $v$. In finite dimensions all linear maps are bounded. In this case we can define the norm of $A$ to be the smallest such constant, or more precisely, define $||A|| = \sup_{v \neq 0} |Av|/|v|$. (See [[Differential Calculus in Rn#The Metric Space of Linear Operators|here]] for more on norms of linear operators.) To recall some results: for all $A, B, v$, we have $|Av| \leq ||A|| \cdot |v|$, $||cA|| = |c|||A||$, and $||A + B|| \leq ||A|| + ||B||$. The norm induces a metric on the space of all matrices, which lets us define infinite sequences and sums of matrices. 
## Proof of Convergence
We can then look back at the definitions $e^A = \sum_k \frac{1}{k!}A^k = I + A + \frac{1}{2}A^2 + \frac{1}{6}A^3+ \dots$ and $e^{tA} = \sum_k \frac{1}{k!}(tA)^k = \sum_k \frac{t^k}{k!}A^k$. These infinite series of matrices can be defined as infinite sequences of their partial sums, in the usual way, with convergence of infinite sequences defined using the metric induced by the norm. We then have that, as long as $||A||$ is finite, this series converges for all $t$, and we have $\frac{d}{dt}e^{tA} = Ae^{tA}$. 

Proof: set $E_N = \sum_{k=0}^N \frac{t^k}{k!}A^k$. We will show that the sequence $E_N$ is Cauchy. Then, for $N > M$, $||E_N - E_M|| \leq \sum_{k=M+1}^N ||\frac{t^k}{k!}A^k|| \leq \sum_{k=M+1}^N |\frac{t^k}{A^k}| \cdot ||A^k||$. Since $||AB|| \leq ||A|| \cdot ||B||$, we have $||A^k|| \leq ||A||^k$. Thus $||E_N - E_M|| \leq \sum_{k=M+1}^N |\frac{t^k}{k!}| \cdot ||A||^k  = \sum_{k=M+1}^N \frac{(t||A||)^k}{k!}$. These are the partial sums we'd get in evaluating $e^{t||A||}$ (here using the ordinary real-number exponential). We know from the properties of the exponential that, for any $x \in \R$, the sequence of partial sums $\sum_{k=0}^N \frac{x^k}{k!}$ converges, and so is Cauchy. Thus $E_N$ is Cauchy. Since the operator norm $||A||$ is equivalent to the Euclidean norm on $\R^{n \times n}$ (all norms on a finite-dimensional vector space are equivalent), and the metric induced by the Euclidean norm gives a complete metric space, the space of $n \times n$ matrices is complete.  Thus, since $E_N$ is a Cauchy sequence, it converges to some matrix for any $t$. Since this series converges (to a matrix) for any $t$, we get a function $E: \R \to \R^{n \times n}$ by $E(t) = \sum_{n=0}^\infty \frac{t^n}{n!}A^n$. Differentiating term by term gives us $\frac{d}{dt}E(t) = \sum \frac{nt^{n-1}}{n!}A^n = A \sum \frac{t^{n-1}}{(n-1)!}A^{n-1} = AE(t)$. (This differentiation can be justified by the fact that the series converges uniformly on any interval $[-T, T]$.)

As an example, for $A = \MatrixTwoTwo{0}{1}{-1}{0}$ we have $A^2 = -I$, $A^3 = -A$, $A^4 = I$, and so on. Thus we get $e^{A} = I + tA + \frac{t^2}{2!}(-I) + \frac{t^3}{3!}(-A^3) + \frac{t^4}{4!}I + \dots$ = $(I - \frac{t^2}{2!}I + \frac{t^4}{4!}I + \dots) + (A - \frac{t^3}{3!}A + \frac{t^5}{5!}A + \dots)$ = $\cos(t)I + \sin(t)A = \MatrixTwoTwo{\cos(t)}{\sin(t)}{-\sin(t)}{\cos(t)}$.
## Generalizations
The proof relied only on the boundedness of $A$ and the completeness of the space of matrices. A *Banach space* is a complete normed vector space, i.e. a vector space which is complete with respect to the metric induced by that norm; we can prove that the set of bounded linear operators on a Banach space is also a Banach space (with respect to the operator norm). Thus the proof works in the broader setting of bounded linear operators on Banach spaces, so $e^{tA}$ is well-defined on any such space. 

In fact, we can generalize further by replacing the exponential with any analytic function. If $f$ is an analytic function whose power series converges at $||A||$, then $f(A)$ can be defined in the same way as the matrix exponential. 

