$\newcommand{\C}{\mathbb{C}}$
$\newcommand{\Z}{\mathbb{Z}}$ 
# N-Dimensional Real Projective Space
The "real projective space" $\R P^n$ is given by the set of all lines through the origin in $\R^{n+1}$. This is a quotient of $\R^{n+1}\backslash \{0\}$ by the equivalence relation that identifies all vectors which are nonzero scalar multiples of each other. Thus the equivalence class of a vector $v$ is the span of $v$. We can then use the quotient topology on this set of equivalence classes. 

First we show that, in this topology, $\R P^n$ is locally Euclidean. (Throughout, we use $[x^0, \dots, x^n]$ to represent the equivalence class of $(x^0, \dots, x^n)$ in $\R^{n+1}$.) We will start by finding some open sets, and we'll then go on to define charts on those sets. Take an open set $\tilde{U}_k$ defined as all the points in $\R^{n+1}$ with a nonzero $x^k$ coordinate. (Thus it's the whole space minus a hyperplane perpendicular to the $x^k$ axis, passing through the midpoint of that axis.) Now let $U_k$ be the image of that under the quotient map. ; this is open if and only if $\pi^{-1}(U_k) = \pi^{-1}(\pi(\tilde{U}_k))$ is open, by the properties of quotient maps. We claim that $\pi^{-1}(\pi(\tilde{U}_k)) = \tilde{U}_k$, which is open. Let $x$ be in that set on the left-hand side; then $\pi(x) \in \pi(\tilde{U}_k)$, so there exists $y \in \tilde{U}_k$ with $\pi(x) = \pi(y)$. Thus $x = ty$ for some nonzero scalar $t$. Since $y \in \tilde{U}_k$ it has a nonzero $x^k$ coordinate, and so does $x$, since it's a scalar multiple of $y$. Thus $x \in U_k$. Conversely, let $x \in \tilde{U}_k$; the fact that it is in $\pi^{-1}(\pi(\tilde{U}_k))$ follows from basic set theory. Thus $\pi^{-1}(\pi(\tilde{U}_k)) = \tilde{U}_k$ and so $\tilde{U}_k$ is open.

Now define charts $\phi_k$ on the $U_k$ by $\phi_k([x^0, \dots, x^k]) = (x^0/x^k, \dots, x^{k-1}/x^k, x^{k+1}/x^k, \dots, x^n/x^k)$. That is, we remove the $x^k$ coordinate and divide everything else by $x^k$, which we can do since $x^k$ is nonzero. This is well-defined, in the sense that using any other representative for the equivalence class (which must be of the form $[tx^0, \dots, tx^k]$) gets us the same result. For each coordinate of the result is then of the form $(tx^i)/(tx^k) = x^i/x^k$, which is the same as before. We claim that $\phi_k$ is a homeomorphism. Continuity follows from (something about quotient mappings; since $\phi \circ \pi$ is continuous $\phi$ must be as well). Its inverse is given by $(y^1, \dots, y^n) \to [y^1, \dots, 1, \dots, y^n]$, with a $1$ in the $k$th coordinate slot. Under the forward map a point $[x^0, \dots, x^n]$ gets mapped to $(x^0/x^k, \dots, x^{n+1}/x^k)$, with the $k$th coordinate removed and that in turn gets mapped by the inverse to $[x^0/x^k, \dots, 1, \dots, x^{n+1}/x^k]$. But this is the same equivalence class as the equivalence class you get by multiplying all of those numbers by $x^k$, namely $[x^0, \dots, x^k, \dots, x^{n+1}]$, which is where we started. The other direction works similarly, and so this is an inverse. Finally, we check that the inverse $\psi_k$ is continuous. This is because $\psi_k = \pi \circ \tilde{\psi_k}$ where $\tilde{\psi_k}$ is the corresponding map on representatives of equivalence classes, and both of those maps are continuous. Thus $\phi_k$ is a homeomorphism to $\R^n$, and all the charts $(U_k, \phi_k)$ cover $\R P^n$ (since we've excluded the point $(0, \dots, 0)$, every point has at least one nonzero coordinate, and so is in at least one of the $U_k$), so $\R P^k$ is at least a topological manifold.

# Complex Projective Space
The complex projective space $\C P^n$ is defined similarly to real projective space: the set of all complex lines through the origin in $\C^{n+1}$, or equivalently the quotient of $\C^{n+1} - \{0\}$ by the equivalence relation that identifies two vectors if they are complex scalar multiples of each other. 

We can put charts on $\C P^n$ in a way that's also similar to what is done for $\R P^n$. Once again, one uses coordinates $[z^0, \dots, z^n]$ (where this has the same coordinates as $[\lambda z^0 ,\dots, \lambda z^n]$ for any nonzero complex $\lambda$), and defines charts on the set $U_i$ of points whose $i$th coordinate is nonzero by $\phi_i([z^0, \dots, z^n]) = (\frac{z^0}{z^i} , \dots, \frac{z^{i-1}}{z^i}, \frac{z^{i+1}}{z^i}, \dots, \frac{z^n}{z^i})$. The proof that these define an atlas on $\C P^n$ proceeds similarly. 

Just like how $\R P^n$ can be thought of as the $n$-sphere with antipodal points identified, which is the same as quotienting it by a certain group action of $\Z/2\Z$ on the points of the sphere, $\C P^n$ can be thought of as a quotient of the $2n+1$ sphere by an action of the circle group $S^1$. 

$\C P^1$ is the "Riemann sphere", homeomorphic to $S^2$, similarly to how $\R P^1$ is homeomorphic to $S^1$. 