# Classification of Quadratic Curves
The general quadratic polynomial in $2$ variables can be written as $ax^2 + bxy + cy^2 + dx + ey + f$. We will show that, by transforming the coordinates by [[Orthogonal Operators and Isometries|rigid motions]] (equivalently, by a suitable choice of orthogonal axes), we can transform this into one of the following forms:

$ax^2 + by^2 = c$, with $a, b > 0$ (ellipse)
$ax^2 - by^2 = c$, with $a, b > 0$ (hyperbola)
$y = ax^2$ (parabola)
$y^2 = ax^2$ (two lines)
$ax + by + c = 0$ (line)
$x^2 = 0$ (single point)
$ax + b = 0$ (single point)
$x^2 = a$ with $a \neq 0$ (two points)

First we rewrite the polynomial in matrix form. The "quadratic form" part $ax^2 + bxy + cy^2$ can be rewritten as $X^t AX$ where $X$ is the column vector $(x, y)^t$ and $A$ is the matrix $\MatrixTwoTwo{a}{b/2}{b/2}{c}$. Similarly, letting $B = (d, e)^t$, we have $dx + ey = B^tX$. By the spectral theorem, there exists an orthogonal matrix $P$ such that $PAP^t$ is diagonal. Thus, when we make the change of coordinates $X' = (x', y')^t = P^t X$, we get (abusing notation to reuse $a, b,$ etc. for the new coefficients and $x, y$ for the new variables) $ax^2 + by^2 + cx + dy + e = 0$. Now consider a few cases. 

First, suppose that $a, b$ are both nonzero. Then we can eliminate the $cx + dy$ terms by "completing the square", i.e. making the substitutions $x = x' - \frac{c}{2a}, y = y' - \frac{d}{2b}$, to get (abusing notation once again--we will keep doing this throughout, always choosing the first few letters as our coefficients) $ax^2 + by^2 - c = 0$. When $c = 0$ this is the degenerate case of two lines. Otherwise we get $ax^2 + by^2 = c$. When $a, b, c$ all have the same sign, this is an ellipse. When $a, b$ are both positive but $c$ is negative, or vice versa, the locus is empty, but it still in some sense has the form of the ellipse. When $a, b$ have opposite signs, this is a hyperbola. 

Now suppose that one of $a, b$ is nonzero: without loss of generality, say $a$ is nonzero. Then in the equation $ax^2 + dx + ey + f = 0$, we can eliminate $d$ by completing the square to get $ax^2 + by + c = 0$, but can't eliminate $b$ in the same way. If $b = 0$ then we get $ax^2 + c = 0$ which has either two roots or, if $c = 0$, a double root, in which case the locus consists of one or two points. If $b \neq 0$ then we can rearrange to get a parabola $y = ax^2 + b$, and a further translation of $y$ reduces this to $y = ax^2$. 

Suppose finally that, in $ax^2 + by^2 + cx + dy + e = 0$, $a, b$ are both equal to $0$. Then our equation has the form $ax + by + c =0$, which is either a line, a single point, or empty. 

# Classification of Quadric Surfaces
We can use the same principles to classify quadric surfaces, i.e. the zero loci of quadratic polynomials in $3$ variables. We diagonalize the quadratic form with an orthogonal transformation. to get a polynomial of the form $ax^2 + by^2 + cz^2 + dx + ey + fz + g$. When $a, b, c$ are nonzero, we can eliminate the corresponding linear terms by completing the square (i.e. applying a translation). The result is determined by the relative signs of the coefficients and which linear terms can get eliminated. 

The nondegenerate cases are as follows (assume all constants $a, b,$ etc. are positive):
The ellipsoid $ax^2 + by^2 + cz^2 = 1$
The hyperboloid of one sheet $ax^2 + by^2 - cz^2 = 1$
The hyperboloid of two sheets $ax^2 - by^2 - cz^2 = 1$
The elliptic paraboloid $z = ax^2 + by^2$
The hyperbolic paraboloid $z = ax^2 - by^2$

Some of the degenerate cases are interesting. $ax^2 + by^2 = 1$ gets you an infinite cylinder, and more generally, if one of the variables is eliminated completely, then you get something whose cross-section along (say) the $xy$ plane is the same quadratic curve for any value of $z$. If all the linear terms and the constant term are eliminated, but not any of the quadratic terms, then you get something of the form $ax^2 + by^2 + cz^2 = 0$. Notice that multiplying $(x, y, z)$ by any constant $t$ gets you another solution: $a(tx)^2 + b(ty)^2 + c(tz)^2 = t^2(ax^2 + by^2 + cz^2) = 0$. Thus, thinking of points in the locus as vectors, the scalar multiple of one point in the locus is another point in the locus, i.e. whenever the locus contains a point, it contains the 1d subspace generated by that point. Thus the locus is a union of lines through the origin, which makes it geometrically obvious that it's a pair of cones whose vertices meet at the origin. 

# Parameterizations of Quadratic Curves
## Rational Parameterizations
On any quadratic curve we have the following property: a line with rational slope which intersects a quadratic curve with rational coefficients at one rational point must intersect it in another rational point. (Say that $p(x, y)$ is such a curve, and let $l = ax + b$ be a rational line; then the intersections of the curve and line are given by $p(x, ax + b) = 0$, which has 2 roots. By assumption one of those roots is rational, and the requirement that the coefficients be rational forces the other root to be rational, by the rational root theorem.) Conversely, the line between any two rational points on such a curve has rational slope. Putting these together, if we pick one rational point $(x, y)$ on $p$, we can get all rational points on $p$ by looking at all the rational lines that pass through $(x, y)$ and seeing where else they intersect $p$. 

The standard example of this is the rational parameterization of the unit circle $x^2 + y^2 = 1$. This has one obvious rational point at $(-1, 0)$, i.e. the leftmost point of the circle. Any rational line passing through this point will have the form $y = t(x + 1)$ where $t$ is a rational number. Substituting this into the equation of the circle we get $x^2 + t^2(x + 1)^2 = 1$ or $x^2 + t^2x^2 + 2t^2x + t^2 - 1 = 0$ or $(1 + t^2)x^2 + 2t^2x + (t^2 - 1)$. Letting $r$ be the other root besides $-1$, Vieta's formulas tell us that $-r = \frac{t^2 - 1}{1 + t^2}$ or $r = \frac{1 - t^2}{1 + t^2}$. Thus the other rational point has x-coordinate $\frac{1 - t^2}{1 + t^2}$. Substituting this into $y = t(x + 1)$ we get $y = t(\frac{1 - t^2}{1 + t^2} + 1) = t(\frac{1 - t^2 + 1 + t^2}{1 + t^2}) = t(\frac{2}{1 + t^2}) = \frac{2t}{1 + t^2}$. Thus $x = \frac{1 - t^2}{1 + t^2}, y = \frac{2t}{1 + t^2}$ gives us a parameterization of the circle by rational functions. 

Substituting $t = p/q$ for integers $p, q$ 

We can do the same thing with the hyperbola. Take the standard hyperbola $x^2 - y^2 = 1$. Once again we have an obvious rational point $(1, 0)$. Rational lines through this point have the form $y = t(x - 1)$ for rational $t$. Substituting this into the equation gets $x^2 - t^2(x - 1)^2 = 1$ or $x^2 - t^2x^2 + 2t^2x - t^2 - 1 = 0$, or $(1 - t^2)x^2 + 2t^2x - (t^2 + 1) = 0$. The given rational point $(1, 0)$ implies a root at $x = 1$, and Vieta's formulas then imply that the other root is at $x = \frac{-t^2 - 1}{1 - t^2}$. We then get $y = t(\frac{-t^2 - 1 - 1 + t^2}{1 - t^2}) = t(\frac{-2}{1 - t^2}) = \frac{-2t}{1 - t^2}$. 

The parabola $y = x^2$ has the obvious rational parameterization $x = t, y = t^2$. Thus all of the nondegenerate conics can be parameterized by rational functions. 

## Parameterizations by Inverting Integrals
