
# Pointwise convergence
Let $(f_n)$ be a sequence of functions on the same domain $E$, and suppose that for all $x \in E$, the sequence $(f_n(x))$ converges. Then we can define a function $f$ given by $f(x) = \lim_{n \to \infty}f_n(x)$, and say that $(f_n)$ converges pointwise to $f$. 

Pointwise convergence fails to preserve many properties of the functions in the sequence. For instance, the pointwise limit of a sequence of continuous functions is not necessarily continuous. This fact can be phrased in terms of interchanges of limit operations: if $f_n$ is continuous for any $n$, then $\lim_{y \to x}f_n(y) = f(x)$; if the limit is continuous then we have that $\lim_{y \to x}\lim_{n \to \infty}f_n(y)$ (i.e. the limit, as $y$ goes to $x$, $f(y)$) is equal to $\lim_{n \to \infty} \lim_{y \to x} f_n(y)$ (i.e. the limit, as $n$ goes to infinity, of $f_n(x)$). The same can be said of differentiability and other such properties. This motivates the stronger notion of uniform convergence.
# Uniform Convergence
Let $(f_n)$ and $E$ be as above. Suppose now that, for every $\epsilon > 0$, there exists $N$ such that, for all $n > N$, $|f_n(x) - f(x)| < \epsilon$ for all $x$ in $E$ (so this is a "global" notion which is applied over the whole domain, not just at each point). That is, all the functions in the sequence beyond some index $N$ fit within a "tube" of radius $\epsilon$ drawn around the graph of $f$. In this case, we say that $(f_n)$ converges uniformly to $f$. 

A consequence of this definition is that the "maximum difference" between $f_n$ and $f$ goes to $0$ as $n$ goes to infinity: more formally: $\lim_{n \to \infty} (\sup_{x \in E} |f_n(x) - f(x)|) = 0$. The converse is also true. Thus if a sequence converges pointwise but not uniformly, that supremum must not go to $0$: roughly speaking, there must be some positive lower bound on the "maximum difference".

Another equivalent condition for uniform convergence is what we might call the "uniform Cauchy" property: $f_n$ converges uniformly to $f$ on $E$ if and only if, for all $\epsilon > 0, x \in E$, there exists $N$ such that, for all $n, m > N$, we have $|f_n(x) - f_m(x)| < \epsilon$. For one direction, suppose the "uniform Cauchy" property holds; then for any $x \in E$, the sequence $(f_n(x))$ is Cauchy and so converges to some limit $f_a$. This implies that $f_n$ converges pointwise, at least, to some limit $f$. Now we can go back to the uniform Cauchy condition and take the limit as, say $m$ goes to infinity. Then we get that, for all $n \geq N$, $|f_n(x) - f(x)| < \epsilon$, as desired.

For the other direction, take $\epsilon/2$; then, given that $f_n$ converges uniformly to a limit $f$, there exists some $N$ with $|f_n(x) - f(x)| < \epsilon/2$ for all $n > N$. Thus for any $n, m > N$ we have $|f_n(x) - f_m(x)| \leq |f_n(x) - f(x)| + |f_m(x) - f(x)| \leq \epsilon$, so $(f_n)$ converges uniformly. 
## Continuity
### Uniform Limit of Continuous Functions is Continuous
We will establish eventually that uniform convergence preserves continuity: if a sequence of continuous functions converges uniformly, then its limit is continuous as well. First we need the following lemma:

Let $(f_n)$ converge to $f$ uniformly on a domain $E$, let $x$ be a limit point of $E$, and let $A_n$ be the limit, as $t$ approaches $x$, of $f_n(t)$. Then $\lim_{t \to x} f(t) = \lim_{n \to \infty} A_n$. (As is the case with so many facts about uniform convergence, this can be phrased in terms of interchanging limits: it says that $\lim_{t \to x} \lim_{n \to \infty} f_n(t) = \lim_{n \to \infty} \lim_{t \to x} f_n(t)$. )

A corollary of this is that, if $(f_n)$ is a sequence of continuous functions with limit $f$, we have that $f$ is continuous, i.e. $\lim_{t \to x}  f(t) = f(x)$ for any $x$, since $\lim_{n \to \infty} \lim_{t \to x} f_n(t) = \lim_{n \to \infty} f_n(x) = f(x)$ (with the first equality being because $f_n$ is continuous for any $x$). This is exactly the result about continuity we wanted to prove--now we circle back and prove the lemma.

Proof: first we show that the $A_n$ have a limit $A$ as $n$ goes to infinity; then we'll show that $f(t)$ does indeed converge to that limit as $t$ goes to $x$. So, let $\epsilon > 0$; by the "uniform Cauchy" property discussed above, there exists $N$ such that $|f_n(t) - f_m(t)| < \epsilon$ for all $t \in E$ and all indices $n, m > N$. Now take the limit, as $t$ goes to $x$, of this inequality: we get $|f_n(x) - f_m(x)| < \epsilon$ by continuity, or $|A_n - A_m| < \epsilon$. Thus the sequence $(A_n)$ is Cauchy and so convergent, with a limit we denote by $A$.

Now that we have a limit for the $A_n$ we can proceed with the second part of the proof outlined above. What we want to do is find some neighborhood around $x$ such that $|f(t) - A| < \epsilon$ for a given $\epsilon > 0$. Using the triangle inequality twice, we get $|f(t) - A| \leq |f(t) - f_n(t)| + |f_n(t) - A_n| + |A_n - A|$. The first of those can be controlled by the uniform convergence of $(f_n)$: we let $N_1$ be such that $|f(t) - f_n(t)| < \epsilon/3$ for all $n > N_1$. The last can be controlled by the convergence of the $A_n$: let $N_2$ be such that $|A_n - A| < \epsilon/3$ for all $n > N_2$. As for the middle, we have to do something a bit trickier: letting $N = \max(N_1, N_2)$, and letting $V$ be a neighborhood of $x$ such that $|f_n(t) - A_n| = |f_n(t) - f_n(x)| < \epsilon/3$ for all $t \in V$ (which exists because of the continuity of $f_n$), we can then say that, for all $t \in V, n > N$, we have $|f(t) - A| < \epsilon/3 + \epsilon/3 + \epsilon/3 = \epsilon$ (by the inequality from before). So $f(t)$ goes to $A$ as $t$ goes to $x$, as desired.

### Counterexample to the Converse
On the other hand, if a sequence of continuous functions converges pointwise to a continuous function, it might not be uniform convergence. 

## Integrals
Uniform convergence allows limits of sequences of functions to be interchanged with integrals: more precisely, if $(f_n)$ is a sequence of integrable functions converging uniformly to $f$, then $f$ is integrable, and $\int_a^b fd\alpha = \lim_{n \to \infty} \int_a^b f_nd\alpha$. Proof: letting $\epsilon_n = \sup_{[a, b]} |f_n - f|$, then $f_n - \epsilon_n \leq f \leq f_n + \epsilon_n$; we then have $\int (f_n - \epsilon_n) d\alpha \leq \underline{\int} fd\alpha \leq \ol{\int} fd\alpha \leq \int f_n + \epsilon_n d\alpha$. But those first and last integrals are equal to $\int f_n - \int \epsilon_n$ and $\int f_n + \int \epsilon_n$ respectively. Thus the difference between the upper and lower integrals of $f$ can be squeezed under something proportional to $\epsilon_n$, which goes to $0$, so $f$ is integrable. We're similarly forced to conclude that $\int fd\alpha = \lim_{n \to \infty} \int f_n d\alpha$. 
## Derivatives
Even when a sequence of functions $f_n$ converges uniformly to $f$, the derivatives $f_n'$ may not converge, uniformly or otherwise, to $f'$. (Example: $\sin(nx)/\sqrt{n}$.) However, if the derivatives do converge, we can guarantee that the original sequence converges, and that the derivatives converge to what we expect, given some additional technical conditions.

Let $(f_n)$ be a sequence of differentiable functions on $[a, b]$, such that the sequence $(f_n(x_0))$ converges for some $x_0$. If $(f'_n)$ converges uniformly, then $(f_n)$ converges uniformly to a function $f$, with $f'(x) = \lim_{n \to \infty} f_n'(x)$. 

Proof: first note that we can use the mean value theorem to control how much our functions vary on a given interval. In general if $g$ is differentiable on $[x, t]$ then there exists $c \in [x, t]$ such that $|g(x) - g(t)| = |g'(c)||t - x| \leq \sup_{[x, t]}|g'| \cdot |t - x|$. 

With this in mind, we can begin the proof proper. Let $\epsilon > 0$; since the $f_n'$ converge uniformly, there exists $N$ such that, for all $n, m > N$, we have $|f_n'(t) - f_m'(t)| \leq \epsilon/2(b-a)$ for all $t \in [a, b]$. Also, since $(f_n(x_0))$ converges, it is Cauchy, so we can pick $N$ such that $|f_n(x_0) - f_m(x_0)| < \epsilon/2$ for all $n, m > N$. Now we try to show that $(f_n)$ is uniformly Cauchy as well, by applying the mean value theorem to $f_n - f_m$. If we look at $|f_n(x) - f_m(x) - f_n(t) - f_m(t)|$, we know by the result above that it is at most $\sup_{t \in [a, b]} |(f_n' - f_m')(t)||t - x|$, which is at most $\epsilon/2$, by the bound we got on $|f_n' - f_m'|$ earlier. 

Now we can start using the fact that $(f_n(x_0))$ converges. We get $|f_n(x) - f_m(x)| = |f_n(x) - f_m(x) - (f_n(x_0) - f_m(x_0)) + (f_n(x_0) - f_m(x_0))|$, which, by the triangle inequality, is at most  $|f_n(x) - f_m(x) - (f_n(x_0) - f_m(x_0))| + |f_n(x_0) - f_m(x_0)| < \epsilon/2 + \epsilon/2 = \epsilon$. Thus $(f_n)$ is uniformly Cauchy and so uniformly convergent. 


# Series of Functions
As with numerical sequences, we can define the limit of a sum of functions $\sum_n f_n$ using the sequence of partial sums $f_1, f_1 + f_2, f_1 + f_2 + f_3, \dots$ If this converges pointwise or uniformly to a limit $f$, we say that the series converges pointwise or uniformly to $f$. Equivalently, we define a function $f(x) = \sum_n f_n(x)$ to be the sum of the series $\sum_n f_n$, if the sum (of numbers) $\sum_n f_n(x)$ converges for all $x$. 

## Weierstrass Test
Suppose we have a sequence of bounded functions on $E$, i.e. for each $n$ there exists $M_n$ such that $|f_n(x)| \leq M_n$ , and suppose that $\sum_n M_n$ converges. (Necessarily it will converge absolutely.) Then the series of functions $\sum_n f_n$ converges uniformly. 

Proof: take $\epsilon > 0$; since $\sum M_n$ converges, there exists some $N$ such that, for all $n \geq m \geq N$, we have $\sum_{i = m+1}^n M_i \leq \epsilon$. (This is the "Cauchy"-type condition for series of numbers.) Then for all $x \in E$, letting $s_n = \sum_{i=0}^{n}f_i(x)$, we have $|s_n(x) - s_m(x)|  = |\sum_{i = m+1}^n f(x)| \leq \sum_{i = m+1}^n |f_i(x)| \leq \sum_{i = m+1}^n |M_i| \leq \epsilon$. Thus $f_n$ obeys the "uniform Cauchy" condition from above, and so converges uniformly. 

# The Metric Space of Bounded, Continuous Functions
Given a metric space $X$, we can consider functions from $X$ to $\R$. If these functions are continuous and bounded (mentioning boundedness is redundant if $X$ is compact), we can define a natural metric on the set $C(X)$ of all such functions, using the "sup norm": $||f|| = \sup_{x \in X} |f(x)|$. Since the functions are all bounded, this will be always be finite and well-defined. We can also check the other main properties of norms. $||f|| = 0$ if and only if $f$ is $0$ everywhere on $X$. We also have a triangle inequality, $||f + g|| \leq ||f|| + ||g||$, just by using the triangle inequality on $|f(x) + g(x)|$: since $|f(x) + g(x)| \leq |f(x)| + |g(x)|$ for any $x$, we have $\sup_{x \in X} |f(x) + g(x)| \leq \sup_{x \in X} |f(x)| + \sum_{x \in X} |g(x)| = ||f|| + ||g||$. 

This norm then induces a metric, $d(f, g) = ||f - g||$. We can then see that uniform convergence of sequences of functions is equivalent to convergence of sequences of functions in this metric space. 

FILL IN MISSING STUFF LATER

We first note that our one of our desired results about convergent subsequences hold on countable sets. That is, if $(f_n)$ is a pointwise bounded sequence on a countable set $E$, then $(f_n)$ has a subsequence $(f_{n_k})$ such that $(f_{n_k})$ converges for all $x \in E$. 

Proof: first enumerate the points of $E$ as $(x_n)$. For any given $x_i$, the sequence $f_n(x_i)$ is bounded and so has a convergent subsequence, which we denote $S_i = (f_{i, k})$; this converges as $k$ goes to infinity. We can write out all the $S_i$ in a grid:

$f_{1, 1}, f_{1, 2}, f_{1, 3}, \dots$
$f_{2, 1}, f_{2, 2}, f_{2, 3}...$
$\vdots$

(Note that these are sequences of functions, not of real numbers--we aren't evaluating the $f_{i, j}$.) 

Recall the definition of equicontinuity: a set $F$ of functions is equicontinuous if, for all $\epsilon > 0$, there exists $\delta > 0$ such that $|x - y| < \delta$ implies $|f(x) - f(y)| < \epsilon$. This is connected to uniform convergence: let $K$ be a compact metric space, and let $(f_n)$ be a sequence of continuous functions on $K$ that converges uniformly. Then the set $\{f_n\}$ is equicontinuous.

The rough idea of the proof is that, for a given $N$, we have $|f_n(x) - f_n(y)| \leq |f_n(x) - f_N(x)| + |f_N(x) - f_N(y)| + |f_N(y) - f_n(y)|$ by the triangle inequality. We can use uniform Cauchy to pick a large enough $N$ that the first and last terms can be controlled, and then use the uniform continuity of $f_N$ (since it is continuous on a compact set) to pick a $\delta$ such that the middle term is controlled.

All this builds up to the Arzela-Ascoli theorem: let $K$ be a compact metric space, with $f_n \in C(K)$; if $(f_n)$ is pointwise bounded and equicontinuous, then a) $(f_n)$ is in fact uniformly bounded and b) $(f_n)$ has a uniformly convergent subsequence. b) is the most important condition here, reminiscent of the fact that in a compact set, any sequence has a convergent subsequence.

First we handle (a). Let $\epsilon > 0$; since the $f_n$ are equicontinuous we have $\delta > 0$ such that, for all $n, x, y$, with $d(x, y) < \delta$, we have $|f_n(x) - f_n(y)| < \epsilon$. Since $K$ is compact we can cover it with finitely many balls $B_\delta(x_i)$; since $(f_n)$ is pointwise bounded, for each of those $x_i$ there exists $M_i$ with $|f_n(x_i)| \leq M_i$ for all $n$. Now let $x \in K$, and let $x_i$ be the point such that $B_\delta(x_i)$ contains $x$. Then for all $n$, $|f_n(x)| \leq |f_n(x_i) - f_n(x)| + |f_n(x_i)|$; the first of those terms is less than $\epsilon$ by equicontinuity, the second is at most $|M_i|$ ,and so $|f_n(x)| \leq 1 + \max M_i$ (well-defined since there are finitely many $M_i$). This then gives a uniform bound on the $f_n$. 

Now we move on to (b). Pick a countable dense subset $E$ of $K$ (which must exist since $K$ is compact); there exists a subsequence $g_i = f_{n_i}$ such that $g_i(x)$ converges for all $x \in E$. Now we try to extend this convergence to convergence on the rest of $K$. Let $\epsilon > 0$; by equicontinuity there exists $\delta > 0$ such that, for all $i, x, y$ with $d(x, y) < \delta$, we have $|g_i(x) - g_i(y)| < \epsilon$. Cover $K$ with $\delta$-balls around every point of $E$ (this is a cover since $E$ is dense in $K$), and reduce to a finite covering, $K \subseteq \bigcup_{j=1}^m B(x_j, \delta)$ where the $x_j$ are in $E$. 

Now, since $(g_i)$ converges on $E$, there exists $N$ such that $|g_i(x_k) - g_j(x_k)| < \epsilon$ for all $k \in 1, \dots, m$ and $i, j \geq N$ (by the Cauchy property). Now let $x \in K$. There exists $x_k$ such that $x \in B(x_k, \delta)$, since those balls cover $K$. We have $|g_i(x) - g_i(x_k)| < \epsilon$ by equicontinuity and the fact that $x$ is in the $\delta$-ball around $k$. Now look at $|g_i(x) - g_j(x)|$; this is at most $|g_i(x) - g_i(x_k)| + |g_i(x_k) - g_j(x_k)| + |g_j(x_k) - g_j(x)|$ by the triangle inequality. The first and third of those terms are bounded by $\epsilon$ per that consequence of equicontinuity, and the second is bounded by Cauchyness. Thus $|g_i(x) - g_j(x)| < 3\epsilon$ for all $x$, so the $g_i$ are uniformly Cauchy and so uniformly convergent. 

# Power Series
We review some basic facts about power series. If the (numerical) series $\sum c_nx^n$ converges for $|x| < R$, then the sequence of functions $f(x) = \sum c_nx^n$  converges uniformly for $|x| < R - \epsilon$ for any $\epsilon$. If it is continuous on $[-R, R]$ then it is infinitely differentiable on $[-R, R]$, and we can differentiate term by term; it is also integrable, and we can integrate it term by term. (On the other hand, infinitely differentiable does not imply analytic.) The coefficients on a power series are unique in the following sense under the following conditions: if $\sum a_nx^n$ and $\sum b_nx^n$ converge on $S = (-R, R)$, let $E$ be the set of all points in this interval where the two power series agree; if $E$ has a limit point in $S$ then $a_n = b_n$ for all $n$ and so the equality of power series holds for all $x \in S$. 