The symmetric group $S_n$ is the group of all permutations of an n-element set--say, for concreteness, $\{1, 2, \dots, n\}$. 

N.B. this article covers some of the same topics as [[Cycles and Inversions in Permutations]], but from a mainly group-theoretic perspective rather than a combinatorial perspective. See there for a description of the cycle notation, cycle decomposition of a permutation, etc.
# Basic Properties
By basic combinatorics, the symmetric group has order $n!$. 

A cycle of $k$ elements has order $k$. A product of disjoint cycles $c_1, \dots, c_m$ has order $\operatorname{lcm}(\ord(c_1), \dots, \ord(c_m))$; this follows from the fact that disjoint cycles commute. 
# Symmetric Groups of Low Order
$S_1$ is just the trivial group, consisting only of the identity.

$S_2$ is the cyclic group of order 2, and can be described as $\langle x \mid x^2 = 1 \rangle$, where $x$ is the 2-cycle $(21)$. 

$S_3$--which, incidentally, is the smallest nonabelian group--has 6 elements, the identity, the 2-cycles or transpositions $(21), (31), (32)$, and the 3-cycles $(312), (321)$. It can be described as $\langle x, y \mid x^3 = 1, y^2 = 1, x^2y = yx \rangle$, where $x$ is any 3-cycle and $y$ is any 2-cycle. It has 4 nontrivial subgroups: the subgroup $1, (312), (321)$ of 3-cycles, also known as $A_3$, and for each 2-cycle, the cyclic subgroup generated by it. It is isomorphic to $D_6$, the group of symmetries of the triangle; the 2-cycles correspond to reflections, and the 3-cycles correspond to rotations. 

# Generation by Transpositions
## The Transposition Decomposition Algorithm
Any symmetric group is generated by transpositions $(ij)$. To see this, let $\sigma$ be any permutation, which we can write in one-line notation as $(\sigma(1), \sigma(2), \dots, \sigma(n))$. We give an explicit algorithm for decomposing $\sigma$ into transpositions, by showing how to rearrange $(1, 2, \dots, n)$ into $(\sigma(1), \sigma(2), \dots, \sigma(n))$ using transpositions. 

As an example, consider the 3-cycle $(312)$, which in one-line notation is $(2, 3, 1)$. To rearrange $(1, 2, 3)$ into $(2, 3, 1)$ we first get $2$ in the right place by applying $(21)$; we end up with $(2, 1, 3)$. Then we get $3$ in the right place by applying $(31)$; we get $(2, 3, 1)$, as desired. Thus $(312) = (31)(21)$. 

More generally, we run an algorithm where, at the $i$th step, we put $\sigma(i)$ in the right place by swapping it with whatever ended up in the $i$th position after the previous steps. First we swap $1$ and $\sigma(1)$, which is equivalent to applying the transposition $\tau_1 = (\sigma(1)1)$. Now $\sigma(1)$ is in the right place, since $\tau_1(1) = \sigma(1)$. In one-line notation the result looks like $(\sigma(1), \tau_1(2), \dots, \tau_1(n))$. Then we apply the transposition $\tau_2 = (\sigma(2)\tau_1(2))$. Now $\sigma(2)$ is in the right place, since $\tau_2\tau_1(2) = \tau_2(\tau_1(2)) = \sigma(2)$, and $\sigma(1)$ is still in the right place, since $\tau_2$ only acts on things that are to the right of $\sigma(1)$ in the one-line notation for $\tau_1$. In one-line notation we have $\tau_2\tau_1 = (\sigma(1), \sigma(2), \tau_2\tau_1(3), \dots, \tau_2\tau_1(n))$. We repeat this process; we define $\tau_i$ recursively as the transposition $(\sigma(i)(\tau_{i-1}\tau_{i-2}\cdots\tau_1(i)))$, which puts $\sigma(i)$ in the right place without disturbing $\sigma(1), \sigma(2), \dots, \sigma(i-1)$. After applying $\tau_{n-1}$, everything will be in the right place, so $\sigma = \tau_{n-1}\cdots \tau_2\tau_1$. 
## Generation by Elementary Transpositions
We can further decompose a permutation into "elementary" or "adjacent" transpositions--transpositions of the form $(i(i+1))$--by showing how to decompose an arbitrary transposition into adjacent transpositions. Let $i < j$ and suppose we want to decompose the transposition $(ij)$, which in one-line notation is $(1, 2, \dots, j, \dots, i, \dots, n)$, into elementary transpositions. Focus on the middle part of that one-line notation; what we want to do is rearrange $i, i+1, i + 2, \dots, i + (j - i - 1), j$ into $j, i+1, i+2, \dots, i + (j - i - 1), i$. 

....

Suppose without loss of generality that we want to swap $1$ and $i$; everything we say will work just as well for swapping $i, j$ with $i < j$, but working with $1, i$ cleans up the notation a bit. 

Suppose first we want to swap $1$ and $3$. We can first swap $1$ and $2$ (going from $(1, 2, 3)$ to $(2, 1, 3)$); then swap $2$ and $3$ (going from $(2, 1, 3)$ to $(3, 1, 2)$); then swap $1$ and $2$ again (going from $(3, 1, 2)$ to $(3, 2, 1)$, as desired). Explicitly, we have $(13) = (12)(23)(12)$. 

Now suppose we want to swap $1$ and $4$. Since we already know how to write $(13)$ in terms of elementary transpositions, we can swap $1$ and $3$, then $3$ and $4$, then $1$ and $3$ again, going $(1, 2, 3, 4) \to (3, 2, 1, 4) \to (4, 2, 1, 3) \to (4, 2, 3, 1)$. Explicitly, we have $(14) = (13)(34)(13) = (12)(23)(12)(34)(12)(23)(12)$; since disjoint cycles commute, we can further simplify this to $(12)(23)(12)(12)(34)(23)(12) = (12)(23)(12)(12)(34)(23)(12) = (12)(23)(34)(23)(12)$. 

More generally, we can write $(1n) = (1(n-1))((n-1)n)(1(n-1)) = (12)(23)(34)\cdots ((n-1)n) \cdots (34)(23)(12)$. 
# Sign of a Permutation
