Contents/Geometry.md, before:

[[Manifolds]] Topological and smooth manifolds. Charts and atlases. Quotient manifolds. Smooth functions on manifolds. Immersions, submersions, embeddings, and diffeomorphisms. Embedding theorems. Level sets and the regular value theorem. Manifolds with boundary.
[[Tangent Spaces]] Definition of the tangent space using derivations. Tangent vectors in local coordinates; standard basis for tangent vectors in a given coordinate system. Equivalent definition of tangent vectors as velocity vectors of curves. Differentials of smooth maps, and their relation to all major definitions of tangent spaces. The tangent bundle; vector bundles in general. 
[[Vector Fields on Manifolds]] Smooth vector fields on manifolds. The bracket operation on vector fields. Integral curves of a vector field. Flows: existence and uniqueness, the maximal flow theorem. Lie derivatives. Vector fields related by a smooth map. 
[[Lie Groups and Lie Algebras]] Definition of a Lie group. Examples, including several matrix Lie groups--$GL(n, \R)$, $SL(n, \R)$, $O(n)$, $SO(n)$. Lie algebras: abstract Lie algebras and the Lie algebra associated with a Lie group. The exponential map. Lie subgroups, including one-parameter subgroups; the closed subgroup theorem. Lie algebra homomorphism induced by a Lie group homomorphism. 
[[Differential Forms]] Cotangent vectors and the cotangent bundle. 1-forms: basic properties and operations. General k-forms and operations defined on them: wedge product, pullback, exterior derivative, interior multiplication, Lie derivative.
[[Integration of Differential Forms]] Integration of 1-forms over curves. Closed and exact forms; Poincare lemma. Integration of n-forms in $\R^n$; change of variables in $\R^n$. Integration of forms over general manifolds. Orientations of manifolds.
[[De Rham Cohomology]] 
[[Projective Spaces]]
[[Quadratic Curves and Quadric Surfaces]] Classification of quadratic curves and quadric surfaces. Parameterizations of quadratic curves.

Commit message:

Adding backlog of geometry-related changes; will handle changes from other topics when those notes are more polished

Contents/Geometry.md, after:

[[Manifolds]] Topological and smooth manifolds. Charts and atlases. Quotient manifolds. Smooth functions on manifolds. Immersions, submersions, embeddings, and diffeomorphisms. Embedding theorems. Level sets and the regular value theorem. Manifolds with boundary.
[[Tangent Spaces]] Definition of the tangent space using derivations. Tangent vectors in local coordinates; standard basis for tangent vectors in a given coordinate system. Equivalent definition of tangent vectors as velocity vectors of curves. Differentials of smooth maps, and their relation to all major definitions of tangent spaces. The tangent bundle; vector bundles in general. 
[[Vector Fields on Manifolds]] Smooth vector fields on manifolds. The bracket operation on vector fields. Integral curves of a vector field. Flows: existence and uniqueness, the maximal flow theorem. Lie derivatives. Vector fields related by a smooth map. 
[[Lie Groups and Lie Algebras]] Definition of a Lie group. Examples, including several matrix Lie groups--$GL(n, \R)$, $SL(n, \R)$, $O(n)$, $SO(n)$. Lie algebras: abstract Lie algebras and the Lie algebra associated with a Lie group. The exponential map. Lie subgroups, including one-parameter subgroups; the closed subgroup theorem. Lie algebra homomorphism induced by a Lie group homomorphism. 
[[Differential Forms]] Cotangent vectors and the cotangent bundle. 1-forms: basic properties and operations. General k-forms and operations defined on them: wedge product, pullback, exterior derivative, interior multiplication, Lie derivative.
[[Integration of Differential Forms]] Integration of 1-forms over curves. Closed and exact forms; Poincare lemma. Integration of n-forms in $\R^n$; change of variables in $\R^n$. Integration of forms over general manifolds; orientations of manifolds. Generalized Stokes' theorem. 
[[De Rham Cohomology]] The algebra of cohomology classes on a manifold. Axioms of de Rham cohomology. Homotopy invariance. Homological algebra: cochain complexes, exact sequences, and the zig-zag lemma. The Mayer-Vietoris sequence. Betti numbers and Euler characteristic in terms of de Rham cohomology. Examples: generalized Poincare lemma, n-sphere, surfaces. Applications: Brouwer fixed point theorem and topological invariance of dimension. 
[[Symplectic Manifolds]] Normal forms of symmetric and skew-symmetric bilinear forms. Symplectic forms on manifolds. Hamilton's equations and abstract Hamiltonian systems. Poisson brackets; Hamiltonian vector fields. Results from Hamiltonian mechanics, including the Gibbs-Liouville theorem, Poincare recurrence theorem, and Noether's theorem.
[[Riemannian Metrics]] Definition of a Riemannian metric. Metric topology induced by a Riemannian metric. Length and energy functionals; geodesics. 

[[Projective Spaces]]
[[Quadratic Curves and Quadric Surfaces]] Classification of quadratic curves and quadric surfaces. Parameterizations of quadratic curves.
