Talk by George Pappas, 11/4/2024
# Elliptic Curves
An *elliptic curve* is a polynomial equation of the form $y^2 = x^3 + ax + b$. We will focus mainly on the case where $a, b$ are both integers. We will also assume that $x^3 + ax + b$ has no multiple roots (so that it has 3 distinct roots over the complex numbers); it will thus factor as either $(x - r_1)(x - r_2)(x - r_3)$ where $r_1, r_2, r_3$ are distinct and real (say, for the future, $r_1 < r_2 < r_3$, or $(x - r)(x^2 + cx + d)$ where $r, c, d$ are real, and the discriminant $c^2 - 4d$ is negative. 

When we graph $x^3 + ax + b$, we get (in the first case) a curve which is negative, then positive, then negative again, then positive or (in the second case) a curve which increases everywhere and only passes through the x-axis once. Because of this, in the first case, the equation $y^2 = x^3 + ax + b$ only has real-valued solutions for $y$ only on the intervals $[r_1, r_2]$ and $[r_3, \infty)$ where $x^3 + ax + b$ is nonnegative. When you graph $y^2 = x^3 + ax + b$, you'll therefore get an "oval" shape on $[r_1, r_2]$, nothing on $(r_2, r_3)$, and another curve (vaguely like a branch of a hyperbola, but "caved in" near the x-axis) from $r_3$ onwards. Everything is symmetric about the x-axis, since at each $x$ we have two solutions for $y$, $y = \pm\sqrt{x^3 + ax + b}$. In the second case we get only the right part of the curve, not the "oval" shape. 
# Rational Points and the Group Law
Many problems in number theory involve looking for integer or rational points on an elliptic curve, i.e. points where both coordinates are integers/rationals. We can often find a single solution by inspection, e.g. $(0, 1)$ is an integer point on $y^2 = x^3 + x + 1$, but finding all solutions (or even answering questions like whether there are finitely or infinitely many solutions) can be much harder. (Note, incidentally, that this curve falls into the second class discussed above, since its derivative is everywhere positive.)

There is, however, a technique for generating another rational point given two rational points. Suppose that $(x_1, y_1)$ and $(x_2, y_2)$ are two distinct rational points on the curve. If we draw a line passing through the two points, it will meet the curve in a third point, which will also be rational. To see this, note first that the line $y = mx + c$ passing through the given points will have rational coefficients $m, b$. When we substitute this into $y^2 = x^3 + ax + b$ we get $x^3 + ax + b - (m^2x^2 + 2mxc + c^2) = 0$, a cubic with two rational roots (namely $x_1, x_2$). Vieta's formulas, combined with the fact that $a, b$ are rational, then implies that the third solution $x_3$ must also be rational, and then its y-coordinate $y_3$ is rational as well. Thus we have generated a third rational point from two rational points.

Suppose we instead have just a single rational point $(x_1, y_1)$. We can then take the tangent line at $x_1$; this will again have rational coefficients, and when we look for its intersections with the elliptic curve, we get a cubic with a double root at $x_1$. The other root must then be rational as well, so we have found another rational point. 

This line-intersection construction defines an operation on the rational points of the curve. For any two rational points , we define  to be the point we get by passing a line through , seeing where it intersects the curve, and then reflecting the result across the x-axis. (For  we use the tangent line instead.) To make this work properly, we need to add a "point at infinity" to the plane; if the line we draw between two points doesn't intersect the curve anywhere else, we say that it intersects the curve "at infinity". This addition operation turns the set of rational points into an Abelian group, with the point at infinity as the identity; this is called the "Mordell-Weil group" of the curve. 
# Elliptic Curves Mod p
Now we consider elliptic curves modulo a prime $p$, i.e. we look for solutions to the congruence $y^2 \equiv x^3 + ax + b \pmod{p}$. We then get a "curve" in a "space" with only $p^2$ points total. For example, if we take the equation $y^2 = x^3 + x + 1$ modulo $5$, the solutions are $(0, 1), (0, 4), (2, 1), (2, 4), (3, 1), (3, 4), (4, 2), (4, 3)$. We then introduce the notation $N_p$ for the number of points modulo $p$; thus, for this curve, $N_5 = 8$. We also have, again using the same curve, $N_{11} = 4, N_{61} = 49, N_{101} = 104, N_{7907}=7905$... as we might expect, the number of solutions generally (but not always) increases as $p$ increases. Indeed, $N_p$ seems to be pretty close to $p$; about the first half of the digits of $N_p$ is equal to the first half of the digits of $p$. This observation can be formalized as the theorem that $|N_p - p| < 2\sqrt{p}$ (that $\sqrt{p}$ factor is meant to single out the last half of the digits). 

A corollary of this is that $\frac{N_p - p}{2\sqrt{p}}$ is a number between $-1$ and $1$, depending on whether $N_p > p$ or $N_p < p$. We might wonder how these numbers are distributed with respect to $p$. It turns out that, if we define $\theta_p$ to be the angle between $0$ and $\pi$ with $\cos(\theta_p) = \frac{N_p - p}{2\sqrt{p}}$, or in other words $\theta_p = \arccos(\frac{N_p - p}{2\sqrt{p}})$, we have the following theorem. Take the the number of primes at most $x$, for which the angle $\theta_p$ is in some interval $[a, b] \subseteq [-1, 1]$, and then divide that by the total number of primes at most $x$, and take the limit as $x \to \infty$. (Loosely speaking, we're looking at the probability that a randomly chosen prime satisfies those inequalities for $\theta_p$. We get a limit $\frac{2}{\pi} \int_a^b \sin^2\theta d\theta$. 
# Mordell's Theorem, Rank, and the BSD Conjecture
We might also ask whether there is a relation between the number of solutions mod $p$ and the number of rational solutions. To say more about this, we need to return to the group law on rational points. Mordell's theorem says that the group is "almost finitely generated", i.e. starting with $r$ points $p_1, \dots, p_r$ and applying the group operation as many times as we want, we can get all but finitely many rational points on the curve. We call the number of generators, $r$, the rank of the curve; intuitively, a larger rank corresponds to having "more" points on the curve. This then gives us a measure of the number of rational points, which we might try to relate to $N_p$, the measure of the number of points mod p. Such a connection is given by the Birch-Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture, which says (in one form) that the product, over all $p \leq x$, of $\frac{N_p + 1}{p}$, is $O(\log(x)^r)$. 

# Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman
As a further application of these ideas, we can use elliptic curves modulo a prime to create a variant of the Diffie-Hellman key exchange protocol. To create a secret key, two parties (say Alice and Bob) publicly exchange a large prime $p$, an elliptic curve over that prime, and a point $q$ in the curve. They then privately pick numbers $a, b$ respectively. Alice computes $aq$, i.e. uses the group law to add $q$ to itself $a$ times; Bob does the same with $bq$. They send the results of these calculations to each other, so that Alice now has both $a$ and $bq$, Bob has both $b$ and $aq$. Alice can then multiply $bq$ by $a$, and Bob can multiply $aq$ by $b$, and they'll get the same result $abq$. They can use this as a "shared secret", and someone who has only their shared information (the curve, the prime, $q, aq, bq$) cannot easily find $a, b$ individually, or $abq$ (so long as $a, b$ were chosen well). This difficulty comes ultimately from the difficulty of calculating $a$ from $q, aq$ (analogous to the hardness of the "discrete logarithm" problem, calculating $b$ from $x$ and $x^b$ modulo some prime $p$). 